SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 8. 

Dear Disciple, 
We have seen in our last Lecture that substances which are recognised as chemical elements but are not made up of atoms which are all of the same atomic weight are said to consist of isotopes. The partial separation of isotopes of a given element has been successfully accomplished by means of distillation, diffusion, electrolysis, and electromagnetic and electrostatic processes. 
We have seen how the study of the atom, that 'ultimate particle' of matter which 'could be divided no further', has led us into an unseen universe which is subject to all the laws and phenomena of our own Solar System. The further Science probes into the mysteries of the atom the more astonishing discoveries will be made; but the ultimate secret cannot be unveiled by the material means employed by Science. Only Occult Science can achieve this. 
If an electron is added to an atom we have an atom with a negative charge; in this state the atom is called an ion. The removal of an electron (that is, of a negative charge) is equivalent to the addition of a positive charge; as though one of the charges on the nucleus were unbalanced, and so became effective. Thus we have ions with positive charges as well as ions with negative charges. An ion with a negative charge is called an anion; an ion with a postive charge is called a cation. 
An atom which has lost an electron does not change its identity; it is still an atom of the same element, a charged atom but still the same. Equally, if an atom gains an electron it remains an atom of the same element. But this is not true of the nucleus. The atomic number, that is the number of positive charges on the nucleus, identifies the element. Zinc, for instance, has the atomic number 30; it is identified by the fact that it has 30 charges on the nucleus. If by any means we could expel a proton (with its positive charge) from the nucleus of an atom of Zinc it would cease to be an atom of Zinc; it would become an atom with the atomic number 29 which is an atom of copper. 
It has always been the dream of the alchemists to transmute or change the baser metals into gold. When it was still thought that the ninety or so elements were to be regarded as distinct and unrelated entities the speculations of the alchemists (for so far as they were known) appeared to be dreams. But now Science is not so sure! Elements have been actually transmuted. 
You may have asked yourselves why we have led you into the maze of chemical composition and all its difficulties and complications. When you became a student of real Occultism by entering our Order you may have had other ideas on the subject. You may have thought that the very first thing we should and ought to teach you would be the acquirement of great magical powers, enabling you to perform miracles and to reach illumination by a short cut. If you will take the trouble to read once more our Manifesto at the place where we state the subjects to be studied during the First Grade, you will see that we refer to a study of the material amongst other things. Well, this is just what we have commenced to do, and you will admit that by studying a few of the properties of the atom, we have opened up to you the vista of a series of minute planetary systems of great sublimity. 
With the eyes of your mind you are beholding the marvels of these planetary systems as if you were some great and wonderful being outside the Universe as we know it; a being who might be beholding our little Kosmic cell or atom in which are contained the Sun and the Planets in a similar manner as in the atom. There is a tremendous amount of mystical Wisdom and Illumination within this single thought! Besides — we do not commence with abstract and vain speculations and fantastic dreams that have no actuality anywhere. By following our course of study you are being led along scientific lines, proved by modern physicists and other scientists, towards a goal far beyond Science. By means of the 'simple' laws of the ‘simple' atoms and electrons you will discover in the end that these will lead you to the greater wonders. 
Although Science has observed and tabulated so many effects, it has never yet found their cause or causes. To discover these sublime first causes and the Mighty Beings who caused them is the aim of our present endeavours, and if you think this over carefully you will finally agree that it is very much worth our while to find the Goal of the Spirit if we can do so by means of the material (which is only the reverse of the Spiritual and indissolubly connected with it). 
Each time you take your knife and fork in your hands think of the countless atoms of iron contained within this metal. In each atom of iron 26 planets spin around its central sun, no matter what you do to the iron itself. You may heat it, melt it, break it up in any way you like, but those planets still go on. The brass nails in your shoes, with 29 planets and a sun in each atom of copper and 30 planets and a sun in each atom of zinc, are alive with movement within. Each planet sails along its predestined orbit, and as you wear away those small brass nails with walking, you strew along the highways and byways an infinitude of tiny 
particles, invisible to the eyes, and within each particle there are one or more solar systems which go on undisturbed and unaware of you!! In the same manner you are unaware of and undisturbed by the great Entities outside our Kosmos. With every breath of air you inhale your lungs are filled with the atoms contained in Nitrogen, Oxygen, Argon, Carbon Dioxide, Hydrogen, Neon, Helium, Krypton and Xenon. Each atom of each element a different kind of Kosmos in itself. The sum total of these contained in each breath is almost incalculable. Yet you cannot destroy any of these solar systems as you inhale and exhale them. Do you sense the relation between this example and the 'Breath of God? 
When Science 'decomposes' the atom it is not destroyed even then, but only transmuted to something else. And as you or anyone else cannot destroy matter, so can nothing destroy the real you, dwelling within that body of yours for a lifetime — long or short — during each incarnation. Imperishable, the real you will follow its predestined orbit, you will be invisible to the average human eye, your own eye included, unless you learn to see, just as the atom is invisible. These thoughts — and facts — will make you regard this world with new eyes, if you have never thought them before. If you have done so already our words and Teachings will confirm your previous speculations. 
The actual transmutation of the elements has, so far, been achieved on a very small scale only, as far as worldly Science is concerned. What the alchemists have done and are doing in this regard is another matter which will be discussed by us in the future. If you have any wish to become an alchemist (if you are not one already perchance) you must know the technicalities of atomic construction, for within the few details we have discussed so far lie hidden the keys which will open the doors to the great secrets of alchemy and much of the rest of Occult Science as well as of Mysticism itself. Not only this, but, as we said before, matter and spirit are one, and that which applies to matter applies to spirit also, though in a different manner, as you will learn in time. 
The body you walk about in, that marvel of marvels, which Science is only beginning to understand a little, is an accumulation of chemical combinations of such enormous bulk (when compared with the atom) that each of us is a most complex and enormous universe in himself. Full of wonders and unbelievable marvels we are. Every tiniest particle of us, so small that the microscope cannot trace it, another Kosmic System. All these systems are separated from each other by enormous distances, and the planets in each atom are as far apart from each other (in comparison) as the planets we know are removed from the Sun and from each other. Solid bodies do not exist anywhere, although to our limited vision and senses they seem to be solid. You will learn how to ascertain this for yourself later on, after we have given you certain exercises to awaken the inner sight we all possess. 
When we mentioned the bombardments of the atom we had in mind certain phenomena of which everyone has heard and which many have witnessed. We mean comets with their glowing bodies and long incandescent tails. We are not referring to meteors or meteorites in this instance, or 'shooting stars' as these visitors from Space are often called. The latter are also called fireballs, bolides, or aerolites. The term meteor is sometimes restricted to that class which does not attain a brightness greater than zero stellar magnitude (i.e. not brighter than the planet Jupiter). 
Frequently, the direction of flight of a fireball is observed to change suddenly, and not infrequently a distinct sound is heard either during or shortly after the passage of it. When it explodes, often with a loud detonation, it is called a bolide. These bodies are so completely disintegrated during their passage through the earth's atmosphere that they fall to the surface of the earth as dust. Any one that is large enough to penetrate the atmosphere and arrive at the surface of the Earth as a solid body is called a meteorite or aerolite. The average size of a meteor is about the order of magnitude as the size of a drop of water. Some of them are connected with comets, and this is the only reason that we mention them here at all. There is one well authenticated case in which a comet was observed to disintegrate at several successive returns, and finally it failed to reappear as a comet. In its place there was a meteoric shower. 
You have now completed the second step of this grade and if there are any questions or messages connected with our work you may write to us as directed in the Manifesto. Next week we shall develop our discussion of the comet and other things and give you a very important new exercise. 
May you have full realisation of your Divine Heritance. 
Your Hidden Master 
