SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 3. 

Dear Disciple, 
You are requested to continue the exercises and meditations on Peace, Power and Secrecy and their allied subjects discussed so far in the first two Lectures, until we touch upon these principles again. In the meantime we shall consider for awhile the material conditions in which we are placed upon this Earth, in order to discover what they are and what not. This is very necessary, for unless we thoroughly grasp the real meaning of the material, the Spiritual will remain a closed book to us. We all know that matter is that which makes up the substance of anything, especially of material things. It is the material of which a thing is composed. In Philosophy and Physics it is called the form or being or that substance that is characterised by extension, inertia, weight and so forth. It is thought to be that which constitutes the essence or substance of a particular thing. 
Material things have a corporeal or physical existence. To the materialist they are the beginning and the end of everything; they deny that there is anything not material in man or the universe. Chemistry knows, or thinks, believes, or hopes it knows, a good many facts about matter. This is true of course, for from a material point of view Chemistry knows a very great deal about matter and its composition. To a large extent the chemist is able to analyse the air we breathe, the food we eat, and the liquids we drink; and industry, medicine, and many other things necessary to our existence owe so much to the material science of chemistry that without it mankind would have to forego many of its present comforts...and would be all the better for it! Apart from the chemist and his manipulations of matter, bodily life in itself may be called a complicated chemical process. 
Upon the correct chemical proportions of the contents of our bodies depends our general feeling of well-being. Chemistry declares that when these chemical processes within the living body come to an end that our bodies are dead. But this is a generalisation which can be disproved at once when we consider that the chemical processes of decomposition go on after so-called death. The materialist who considers matter in whatever form, or as a gas, as the only thing that makes up the Universe, is just as wrong as the fanatical person (who thinks he is spiritual) when he states that spirit (whatever he thinks that is) is the only thing in the Universe. 
We may deduce from this that anyone who generalises is always completely wrong, for there are always two sides to everything - material and spiritual. All material things or conditions should be classified as negative, and all spiritual states as positive according to our own conception of these two principles. 
Neither can exist or manifest without the other. We shall prove this in the course of our studies. 
The chemical composition of a substance is subject to various changes under different conditions, depending upon the nature of the individual substance, the nature of other substances present, and the conditions. The most important and fundamental conditions are: temperature, pressure, medium (if any), catalyser (if any), electric direct current, and light. In a given re-action the change in composition of the substance or substances involved is inherently connected with a change of energy. Every re-action, therefore, has both a matter and an energy aspect. 
In the preceding paragraph we find a number of words that are of very great interest to us. We refer to the words 'chemical composition', ‘changes', 'conditions', 'temperature', 'electric currents', and 'energy'. These words and their real meanings will have to be studied and understood, and from time to time we shall discuss them further with you. The further we proceed the more we shall have to refer to these and other material subjects. 
Let us consider the chemistry of matter from a simple viewpoint for a few moments. Let us imagine that the material universe as we see it is constructed of a number of particles which look all more or less alike. These particles combine and arrange themselves in different ways. Every different combination has varying results, and we thus get a number of structures that are totally unlike each other, although they are seemingly built of the same kinds of particles. Chemistry, preceded by the Alchemists, has been trying to discover for many centuries why this is so. 
They consider that if we could change the combinations of the particles we could produce new substances or structures out of the old ones. This led to the endeavour to change the baser metals into gold, and the alchemists thought that if the different metals were composed of the same kind of basic particles that this change, or transmutation would be possible. The search for the transmutation secret went on for centuries. Many times it was said that the secret was discovered. The ancient Egyptians knew alchemy (although it did not originate there). Moses and his sister Miriam were said to be Alchemists, and, as Moses was a great Egyptian Initiate and not an Israelite this is quite possible. 
Other great names of antiquity connected with Alchemy were Job, and even Cleopatra! 
The Arabs carried on the science of Alchemy and from them it spread and lasted until the end of the 18th century. But this was not be finale. Alchemy is studied to this very day, and we know of some of us remarkable discoveries and secrets. We may say that Chemistry is a new form of Alchemy as it transmutes raw materials into all sorts of useful things such as glass, porcelain, and an almost endless variety of other products. John Dalton (1766-1844) revived the idea of the atom as it was imagined by the ancient Greeks. Although the Greeks had devoted but little attention to Alchemy they reasoned that if a substance is first reduced to a very fine powder, and this powder is then dissolved into still smaller particles, which by successive stages are further dissolved until the particles become so small that they are invisible and can no longer be divided, we arrive at the invisible atom. 
Dalton's revival of this idea became the basis of 19th century Chemistry. He gradually classified a number of different kinds of atom. In this manner he arrived at the conception of a number of elements, none of which could be broken up further. 
At the commencement of the 19th century 27 such elements were known, and throughout the century new ones were discovered, until they reached the number of about 90. The tracking down of an element is a very difficult matter, for few of them occur naturally in a free state. Gases such as Oxygen and Nitrogen, as well as other elementary gases are found in a free state in air. Sulphur is found near volcanoes; gold occurs in the form of grains of native gold; charcoal consists mostly of uncombined carbon, whilst diamonds are almost pure carbon. 
But most of the elements are found in combination with entirely different elements within various substances which again differ largely from these elements themselves. If we take chalk we shall find that it consists of a soft silver-white metal called calcium, a black solid in the form of carbon, and a gas called oxygen. In order to separate the elements chemists take certain compounds through which they pass electric currents; they also use acids, alkalis and other re-agents, or treat those compounds with Bunsen burners, blowpipes and furnaces. They also use the spectroscope which identifies the elements of which a compound is composed by means of light which is passed through the heated vapour of a substance. 
Iridium, for instance, was discovered in 1804; it is used for fountain pen points, watch bearings, etc. Aluminium was discovered in 1828; the inert gas called argon was found in 1894. Radium was discovered in 1898. 
But science began to think that the theory of 90 or more different elements was not satisfactory and its exponents returned once again to the old conception that the ultimate of all matter was composed of the same basic materials, and they reluctantly discarded the idea that the elements were totally different in kind. 

Science then commenced to arrange some of the elements in periodic series. The properties of the elements varied from element to element in a particular order, and this order never varied for any of the series. There is for instance the series of fluorine, which boils at a temperature of minus 187°C; Chlorine which boils at minus 34°C; Bromine which boils at 58°C; and Iodine which changes to a gas at 184°C. This shows a periodic rise of the boiling point from element to element. 

The other properties follow the same course through this series of elements in the same order. It was seen that Sodium and Potassium were similar in their properties. Both are soft metals, both burn on water, and they form similar compounds with a certain ‘soapy' feeling when they are dissolved in water. There were noticed other series of related elements until in 1871 the Russian chemist Mendeleyev (1834 1907) produced his famous periodic table. Every element was numbered according to its atomic weight. Hydrogen received the number one, since it is the lightest of all the elements; its atomic weight is 1.0079, its symbol is H. Uranium is the heaviest natural element; its atomic number is 92, its weight 238.03, and its symbol U. *(See note at end). 
By comparing the weight of exactly similar masses of the elements their atomic weights were ascertained, and the atomic weights gave the proportions in which the elements unite, whilst the proportions are simple multiples of the atomic weights. 
You may ask “What has all this to do with Mysticism and Occultism?” It is necessary to have some idea of what science considers to constitute matter before we can study the Laws of Occult Science in regard to matter and spirit. In our next Lecture we shall extend our present theme a little and lead you gradually to a better understanding of the world in which you dwell now, so that you may be prepared for the proper appreciation of other Realms. 
Do not allow yourself to be awed by a few scientific terms, for all will be explained during the course of our studies. 
Do not forget to carry on with your meditations on Peace etc., for that is much more difficult than the study of a few material subjects. 
May your secret self be filled with Power. 
Your Hidden Master 
*The term 'atomic weight' has now been superseded by the more precise unit of 'atomic mass'. We have nevertheless mainly retained the former expression as being less likely to cause confusion within the minds of students who lack scientific training. 
