SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 4. 

Dear Disciple, 
As promised in our last lecture we shall now extend our studies of the material a little further. But ere we do this we wish to point out that on account of the highly condensed nature of our Lectures your Masters have thought it advisable to keep them all about the present length, and to make them neither longer nor shorter on the whole. It would be an easy matter to spread the contents of our Lectures over three or four times the number of pages actually used. But, as we trust that our Students are persons of sufficient intellect to grasp the Essence of our Teachings and add the rest by means of their understanding, we intend to keep to our scheme, which has been proved to be very satisfactory for a great many years already. We do not wish to blind you with a large number of words, but present you with facts instead. Neither do we make a large number of promises at the beginning of our studies and fail to carry them out later on because we either do not know ourselves or have lost interest as happens in many cases of which we have personal knowledge. The wise Student will give proof of his wisdom by his appreciation of our system. We shall not refer to this again. 
Before Mendeleyev arranged the whole series of known elements in order of their atomic weights it had already been noted that they ran in groups of three, and it seemed that the properties of an element depended in some way upon its atomic weight. In each group of three the middle element was halfway between the outside elements. For this reason they were arranged in triads by Science. This gave Mendeleyev the idea of his 'table'. He noticed that certain properties ran through the elements, and that they changed gradually from one to the next. The first element in group one for instance was similar to the first in group two, showing a periodic recurrence of properties, and this was the reason why these groups were called periods. We find that hydrogen and helium are placed at the top of the modern form of the periodic table. They are followed by the first short period of eight elements, and the second short period of eight elements. Then come two long periods of eighteen elements each, followed by one of thirty-two elements, and finally by the fourth long period. If we start from number three (lithium) we find that number eleven (sodium) is the second element in the first group, number nineteen (potassium) the third, and so on. The atomic volume of solid of lithium is 13.1, of sodium 23.7, and of potassium 45.5. You will note the sequence of succeeding 'octaves', as it were, of volume in each successive case. Mendeleyev's table contained a number of gaps, but he was sure that those gaps would be filled eventually. He even predicted the properties of some of these missing elements and he suggested methods for detecting them. To quote one instance, he predicted in 1871 the properties of gallium (the 31st element, with a relative atomic mass of 69.72), and in 1875 this metal was actually discovered with almost all the properties he had predicted. 
Today the natural elements which appear to comprise the complete list have all been discovered, though one or two, such as technetium (No.43) and astatine (No.85) have so far only been detected as a result of the atomic bombardments of molybdenum and bismuth. Furthermore, science has extended the table to include 26 additional 'transuranic' elements (making a total of 118 to date), all of which have been artificially produced by the bombardment of uranium, the last element in the natural scale. However, recently there have been reports regarding the discovery of a fresh series of elements (which Science has variously labelled 'synthetic', 'quasi-synthetic' and 'transactinide') with atomic numbers ranging from 114 to 127, but it will probably be quite some time before these discoveries are confirmed, if, indeed, these claims are valid. 
If the atoms of each element were composed of matter totally different from all others, there would seem to be no reason why some of them should resemble one another, or why there should be progressive differences amongst them. One might ascribe a few casual resemblances to chance, but this was not reasonable, since Mendeleyev had brought the whole range of elements into his periodic table. For this reason the conception, or theory, that an atom is indivisible had to be discarded. 
We may still regard an atom as the smallest fragment of an element which has the properties of an element. An atom of lead, for instance, can still be considered to be a very minute particle of lead. From that point of view we may, by a stretch of the imagination, regard it as so minute that it cannot be divided further. But an atom is a definite structure composed of still smaller particles which – as in the case of lead — are not lead at all. If, for instance, we take the particles which compose an atom of uranium we should find that they are the same as those which compose an atom of hydrogen. The important difference between one of the atoms of the heaviest metal (uranium) and of the lightest gas (hydrogen) lies in the number of particles within their respective atoms and in the manner in which they are arranged. 
The electron was the first of the 'supposed to be' ultimate particles to be discovered, and it was investigated by Sir J. J. Thomson in 1897, when he succeeded in making a rough measurement of the charges carried by the ions of gases. Professor Millikan used a much more precise method by measuring the speed with which a minute drop of liquid is dragged along in an electric field when it picks up one or more stray air ions; the force acting on it being then deduced from the speed, and the charge, in turn calculated from the force and the field intensity. Thomson's method was to pass an electric charge through a tube from which most of the air had been pumped, and when this was done rays were emitted from the cathode, or negative electrode. These rays are known as cathode rays and they are used in television receivers to form pictures on a fluorescent screen. Thomson showed these cathode rays to be streams of minute particles carrying a small electric charge; and these particles he called electrons. He showed at the same time that electrons are always the same, no matter from what source they are derived, and that they are thus the constituents of all kinds of matter. 
In this manner science arrived at the same conclusions as the theories of the Ancient Greeks in respect of the atom; only in the modern instance the 'indivisible' particles are still more minute and have a different scientific name. But the most interesting part of these modern discoveries was, that the cathode rays and the beta rays from radium, when subjected by Thomson to measurement by a type of mass spectrograph method, were found to be composed of particles having a negative charge. There is further every evidence that not only are cathode rays and beta rays composed of electrons, but that swarms of these particles pervade all matter and play an important part in many physical processes such as electric conduction, thermal conduction, magnetism, photo-electric phenomena, thermionic phenomena, the emission of light, and so on, as well as in chemical reactions. 
Here is proof (although it is not needed) that Occult Science was right when it stated many thousands of years ago that matter is negative and spirit positive! We go further, and state that matter is a negative condition, whilst spirit is a positive force. We also teach that matter is life, and below, whilst spirit is Light and Above. 
From this it is but a step to the concept and TRUTH, that attunement with matter is a descent into the lower realms, which are opposite to the higher, whilst attunement with Spirit is an elevation to the higher. As the Higher Realms are those of Light, the opposite to this must be Darkness. As Light is necessarily closely connected with unselfish Love and Service (are not the Angels called the Harbingers of Light?), the Darkness must be its opposite, consisting of hatred and selfishness. Positive Light — the Divine attribute of the Creators, Gods or Lords of the Higher Universe; negative Darkness - the evil attribute of the Destroyers of the nether worlds. 
Thus we find that matter is life in the Darkness of evil and non comprehension of the Divine Laws, and Spirit is the Light of Purity and Wisdom of which the Sun is the symbol, and therefore of a positive nature, though it is only a reflection of the True, Greater and Hidden Sun. Please bear this Law in mind, for it is of importance in view of our later teachings. 
We trust that you, our dear Disciple, will have already realised that right at the commencement of our studies we have treated you as a human being endowed with intellectual understanding, and not as a mere beginner in life, whom it is necessary to place in the Kindergarten Class of metaphysical research and other tuition. We prove to you right away that our studies and teachings are of a very high order indeed, and as you walk along the Path of Enlightenment with us — although we are as yet not visible to you — side by side, and shoulder to shoulder, in that full confidence and trust which should always link the Teacher and his Pupil, you will gradually rise with us to those sublime heights whence we can behold the Sons of Light in all their Majesty and Splendour, and worship at their feet in adoration of their beauty and Wisdom. 
The mystical principles, upon which we have touched but lightly so far, are full of the greatest Glory as you will discern later, and it is our sincere hope, expressed here and now at the end of these first four Lectures, that you will be willing and able to remain with us for many years; first as our Disciple in the Outer Circle of the Mysteries, and then as our Brother and Fellow Worker in the Inner Circle; and eventually if God wills — that you may find entrance into the Holy of Holies of our Supreme Council and become a true Leader of our Brethren in the Outer World, whom it is our duty and privilege to aid in finding the Light. This is a post of honour indeed, for, as Carlyle once said: “A Priest, or interpreter of the Holy, is the noblest and highest of men; so is a sham priest (or teacher) the falsest and basest.” We pray that you may always be regarded in the light of the first part of that sentence. 
Your Hidden Master. 
N.B. Do not forget to carry on daily, as often as you can, with your meditations and exercises on Peace, Power and Secrecy. In our next Lecture we shall continue our discussions of material conditions. Meanwhile we await your first communication if there is anything you wish to ask or tell us about the first four Lectures. 
