SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 1. 

Dear Disciple, 
The Masters of our Secret Order greet you in the Name of the Sacred Mysteries you are now commencing to study. 
May Peace be with you, now and always, for the Mind which is truly at PEACE has already solved a very great secret. Peace is the great Power of those who have found the true balance of their inner principles by means of applied Wisdom, and if you devote yourself to the study of the profound Teachings we shall present to you in the course of our Lectures, inner Peace will come to you by means of the understanding of those Laws, which are truly hidden from the profane, the ignorant and the scoffer. 
You may be sure that the earthly Masters of our Order will follow the course of your individual progress with the greatest attention. You may be sure that the fact of your acceptance amongst us as a beloved Disciple means that you will share with the Sublime Heads of The Order that wonderful protection of the Secret Powers of the Universe, which protection is extended to all genuine Seekers by means of their Brotherly Attunement with Us and with the Beneficent and Holy Principles of wise Leadership extended by the Masters beyond the earthly and other material and Spiritual Realms. 
Our vast Concourse of earnest students is spread over nearly every Country of the World, but for secret reasons, connected with the periods of certain World Cycles, it was not permitted to commence our work in the United Kingdom until 1940. These obstacles were removed and it was with gladness in our hearts that we started our work for the benefit of all Seekers after Truth throughout the World. We have established a number of very important links in the most important Centres, each of which will become a strong focus of attraction by means of our manipulations of certain Laws. Every affiliated member or student has the same privileges in this respect by commencing, if they are able, the formation of cells of three, seven or twelve students as indicated in our Manifesto, which, if you have not received it, or it is not in your possession for any reason whatever, you should write to us at once. 
The formation of such cells or groups is not solely for the purpose of increasing our membership. Nor is it some kind of nefarious 'Ponzi scheme' as some temporary and suspicious Members have had to temerity to tell us! No, there is another and more important Law behind this, and if you select your group members with discretion you will form a centre of attraction which will draw towards you and your group certain marvellous radiations which carry great power with them. But, please be very careful whom you approach among your friends for this purpose. It is essential that there shall be harmony amongst the personalities composing your group, for if this harmony is absent you may obtain negative conditions instead of powerful positive ones. The formation of Groups is entirely optional, and students who for whatever reasons are not able to form a Group are not at any disadvantage in their Studies, nor is this any reflection upon their abilities. 
This is the second Principle mentioned in this Lecture. The first was the importance of Peace; the second is the Power which abides in a harmonious combination of personalities. This is elementary you may say, and you may add that there is nothing new in all this and that you knew it all before. We dare say you did — but have you ever practised either of these simple Principles in a constant and constructive manner applying both unceasingly and persistently to your everyday activities? We dare say that the probabilities are that you have not done so. Such thoughts may have flitted through your mind from time to time, or you may have heard them mentioned once or twice and forgotten them in a few minutes, hours, days or weeks afterwards. But if you had persistently adhered to these two simple rules and put them into practice every day from the first time you heard them mentioned, or when you suddenly thought of them by means of your subconscious memory, or even by inspiration, you would not need to become a student of our Teachings, for your powers would be so great that you would not need any teachings from anybody! 
Just think for a few moments what this means. If these two simple Laws can bring you so much, how much greater will your accomplish ments become when you know — and practise — not only the simple Laws we shall discuss at first but the greater and absolutely unknown Laws and Principles of the Hidden or Occult Wisdom; a Wisdom so magnificent that the ordinary man's mind would be shattered by it if he were not gradually and carefully introduced to its awesome Laws. 
It is very probable that you have never heard about this Secret Order. And it is very certain that you can have absolutely no knowledge as to who we are and what we do during our hours of contact with the world in general. Nor do we have a name by which we are known in the outer world. There is a very important reason for all this secrecy, for it is connected with a third simple Law which many persons have probably heard about, although they never or seldom practise it; nor do they even believe in it as a rule. Nevertheless it is a very true Law, this Law of Secrecy, for when an unknown person, or group, acts in such a superior way that he, or it, could invoke (if they were known) the envy, criticism or even hatred of people who, on account of their lesser degrees of competence cannot act in the same manner, then the fact of being unknown, or hidden, prevents the envious or the critic, from taking direct or indirect action which might injure the superior person if he were known. One cannot hit a target which has no existence, and to all intents and purposes an unseen target or an unknown organisation or person does not exist, and therefore you cannot direct any force to it or him and do either an injury. So very simple again but have you ever consistently thought of this Law or practised it? 
Is it not true also that most people suffer from that amiable weakness which makes them anxious to reveal their intellectual and other attainments to the world at large? But, you may say, if they did not, there would be no progress in the fine arts, in material achievements of all sorts, in science and so on. Quite true; but in our own studies we go beyond materialism, beyond science, and beyond art and all other material phenomena connected with human endeavour. By means of our studies we enter into the Realms of the Spirit; we enter into those vast domains which to the average person seem entirely speculative and imaginary. 
These worlds of the Spirit are generally relegated to the limbo of vain mythological, poetical or even religious dreams which may be true to a small extent but cannot be measured with a ruler, or analysed in the test-tube of a scientist. The most common reaction to the acts or sayings of a person who does proclaim that he is a teacher or a student of such 'fancies', or to one who says that he believes in them, is resentment from those who ‘have no time for such nonsense'. This resentment may be mild or violent. The believer may also be judged to suffer from delusions! Whatever form the resentment takes it sets up a series of greater or lesser inharmonious vibrations. These vibrations act in a disagreeable manner upon both critic and their victim. Both are injured to some degree by these vibrations, and the fault lies with the person who indiscreetly pronounced to a world full of materialists his dreams, speculations, opinions, or his knowledge of conditions beyond the tangible, material conditions of the so-called everyday existence which surround the matter-of-fact person. 
The Hidden Knowledge, or Occult Wisdom should remain hidden from the world in general. The person who broadcasts it indiscriminately is a foolish being who is punished for his lack of tact by those who do not want to hear about such matters. Presenting a perfectly visible target to the world and its critics he is hit by the arrows of the unready. When he is silent and unknown no one can touch him, his work or his disciples, who should also remain silent and hidden. A very simple Law is it not? 
During the coming week you should think constantly about these three simple Principles and put them into practise all the time. You will be surprised to note how difficult it will be when you try to apply these Laws to all the various acts of your life during each day of this first week of your studies. Remember: Peace — Power — Secrecy!! Peace of your mind which will spread through your body. Power by combination of your faculties with those of your friends who truly harmonise with you and with your other friends whom you may deem worthy of being trusted with the news about our Order. Secrecy as far as the outer world is concerned, for the man who has a secret and knows how to guard it has added power unto himself, for if this secret is of a high moral and intellectual nature he will be superior (and therefore more powerful) to the man who has not that secret knowledge. Peace added to the powers of combination and secrecy increases the potency of both, which again will re-act on the state of balance of your inner faculties. 
Thus you will find that these three principles will constantly grow and become more potent within you, and the result will be that in a week from now your whole personality will take on a new tone, a new vitality, and you will have a brighter outlook upon life in general. You will become an influence for good to those around you on account of the greater amount of Universal Force that can now flow through you more freely and pass on from yourself to those whom you may contact daily. But you must give all your attention and endeavours to this first exercise unceasingly during this week. Please make a note of your experiences and write to us when you have completed the work of the first month. Do this always in future if you have anything to report. 
You are to be congratulated upon the important step you have taken by commencing these studies. By doing so you have entered a new cycle of your life which will gradually unfold itself to you as one of beauty, power and happiness. But it depends on you yourself whether you are going to be successful or not. We, your Teachers, can but show you the way; it is for you to march along this Royal Road towards the goal - or sit down beside it ineptly, like the rest of mankind. 
In our next Lecture we will develop these three Principles a little further and tell you about some of their peculiarities. 
With Best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
