SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 7. 

Dear Disciple, 
We are pleased to announce that several Students have been able to form cells. There is a saying which states that ‘A great man is he who can call forth the most select company whenever it so pleases him'. This saying is a very apt illustration of what we have told you before about the power that lies hidden in the combination of harmonious beings; it makes each individual of such a combination or group superior to those who do not belong to the group or to a similar combination of people. Those who have formed the new cells in our Order recently have all been honoured in the usual manner. However, in view of the connotations that this word now has, we wish to make it clear that these honours have nothing whatsoever to do with the 'awards' granted to those in the Media, Business or Politics. No, our honours serve a higher and far nobler purpose than the tinsel and glitter of earthly rewards, which those who have received such honours are aware of but should not reveal to others; thus conforming to our rules of secrecy. 
We are not surprised at the above mentioned results, because our Order has had the same experience all over the world. The work spreads like a snowball, which grows by rolling it in the snow; but it does not melt away afterwards! All masters and leaders of the groups should remember that such organisers as they are will be required later on for special work in the inner group, if they wish to take part in it. The more harmonious groups or cells we have, the greater will be the secret power of their constructors and the Order as a whole; and the larger a cell is (never exceeding the total of 12 students) the more magnetic will be its radiations. Each cell is under a special and additional form of guidance coming from the Adepts of the Supreme Council, which always takes separate note of the various group organisers. If the other work of the latter is equally satisfactory they will be earmarked for future expert work and receive additional ranks and honours in the Inner Circle. However, as a few Students have questioned the formation of groups we wish to add a few final words about this. Firstly, Students who are not able to form a group are not disadvantaged in their Studies and every member has the same opportunity to reach the sublime heights of Mastership. To allay any further confusion, we would add that when the time is right, suitable candidates may appear whom you feel able to recommend, but there is no rush in this, nor do we expect or wish our good Students to act as salesmen for the Order! We shall not repeat these qualifications. 
In our last Lecture we have seen how Science has discovered several properties of the nucleus of the atom. There are however as many principles and laws of a material nature within the nucleus of an atom as there are different kinds of matter to be found on Earth. This also applies to the electrons, the apparently tiny planets that whirl around the Sun or nucleus of the atom. Not only is the nucleus surrounded by a magnetic field but each electron has a similar aura around it, which keeps these tiny planets from colliding with each other. Science will discover this later. Only under certain conditions can the electrons ever collide and destroy each other, or one may destroy and disintegrate another one, or two may join together and change the nature of the element of which they form a part. More of this anon. 
Professor Niels Bohr (1885-1962), the famous Danish physicist whose name was closely associated with the study of atoms, came to the wrong conclusion that the nucleus of an atom is not a solid but a gas. He stated that within that gas the various particles are in constant agitation and are constantly colliding. This is only partly true. The nucleus is not a gas but consists of every material substance known and unknown in a gaseous condition in a manner similar to that of the visible Sun of our Solar System. From the centre of the atom, or the nucleus, a number of living rays are constantly sent out to the electrons, vivifying them in the same manner as our Sun does when it sends out its never ending streams of so-called Cosmic Rays which give life to the whole of our Kosmos or Solar System and all the planets contained within it and their inhabitants. 
When the nucleus of an atom is hit during a 'bombardment' its temperature goes up to a level that has been calculated at 40,000,000°C. The nucleus loses this stupendous heat by emitting particles and rays. If a similar bombardment were possible in connection with our Sun (and it is possible) the same thing would happen, and our Solar System would perish in the same way as the atom. You see here the wisdom of the Hermetic Axiom 'As above, so below; as below, so above’. But the chance that it would happen to our own Kosmos is very remote indeed. If you consider the incalculable number of atoms that make up the sum total of any known element on earth or in the atmosphere, and then think of the comparatively infinitesimal number destroyed by Science during its various experiments, you will realise that on the whole atoms have more chance not to be destroyed than the reverse on account of their incredible multitudes. The same applies to the Kosmic 'Atoms' known as planetary systems. Their numbers are just as unimaginably great, and their chance of destruction is just as remote. Let this be a comfort to you, and do not imagine a super scientist of super Kosmic dimensions playing ducks and drakes with our own Sun and its planets, of which the earth is one!! 
You know that the electrons spin around the nucleus of an atom in the same way as the planets spin around the Sun, and the electrons follow elliptical orbits too. Some electrons are near the nucleus, some are farther away. None can escape from within the boundaries of an atom however, for the atom has also an invisible envelope in the form of an ovoid, or egg-shaped magnetic field or aura. Science will discover the shape of the atom in due course. Returning once more to our Hermetic axiom you will now know that our own Kosmos is formed in the same manner and shape. It is egg-shaped and has an envelope around it which is called the auric envelope, while the Kosmos itself is some times referred to as the Auric Egg in Occult terminology. 
An atom may be stripped of one or more of its electrons, or it can have electrons added to it. It is possible to deprive a Hydrogen atom of its single electron by passing an electrical discharge through the gas hydrogen in a rarefied condition. In 1919 Rutherford disintegrated the atom of Nitrogen by bombardment with alpha particles fired off from what is called Radium-C. 
The alpha rays are emitted from radioactive substances and there are three types of rays emitted in this manner. They are called Alpha, Beta, and Gamma Rays. In kind they resemble anode rays (the anode is the positively charged pole in an electrolytic cell, or a gas discharge tube); cathode rays (which are those electrodes in an electrolytic cell or gaseous discharge vacuum tube which have the lower electric potential); and X-rays (these arise wherever cathode rays encounter solids). 
Alpha rays are positively charged particles which are slightly deflected by electrical and magnetic fields. 
Beta rays are negatively charged electrons, and they are largely deflected by electrical and magnetic fields. 
Gamma rays are undeflected by electrical and magnetic fields. Remember that such fields are the same as the aura around the human body. 
Alpha rays consist of particles shot off from the interior of atoms of certain elements with a definite velocity and a definite range for each element. But this happens to but a few elements, or under exceptional and forced conditions. The general rule that electrons do not and cannot escape from the atom holds good. The velocity referred to is from 5 to 7% of that of light. Its penetrating power is the smallest of the three kinds of rays under discussion, the beta rays being of the order of 100 times, and the gamma rays 10,000 times more penetrating. 
The alpha rays are particles of Helium, and Ramsay and Royds (1909) experimentally demonstrated that accumulated alpha particles, quite independently of the matter from which they have been expelled, consist of helium. They sealed radon in a glass tube with a wall so thin that the alpha particles passed through the wall into a surrounding vessel, and after six days the whole spectrum of helium rays was observed. Helium itself does not pass through such a wall. Therefore alpha particles on losing their charge become ordinary helium. This is the first instance of the production of a known element during radioactive transformation. 
The loss of a single alpha particle by an atom leaves the residual atom four units less in atomic weight and two positive charges less in valence (Fajans 1913). Valence is the capacity of an atom to combine with other atoms to form a molecule. 
The shooting of alpha particles may be visibly registered by a spinthariscope, in which the tip of a wire, coated by a tiny amount of a radium compound, is placed near a screen coated with zinc blende. Viewed in the dark with a magnifying eyepiece, each alpha particle striking the zinc blende target emits a visible scintillation. It is as if one were seeing atoms! The detection and counting of single alpha particles was accomplished by Rutherford and Geiger (1908) by the deflection of an electrometer needle upon the arrival of each alpha particle in a gas at low pressure in an electric field somewhat below sparking point. 
Beta rays are electrons shot off from the interior of certain elements with velocities varying almost up to that of light. The loss of a single beta particle by an atom leaves the residual atom the same in atomic weight and one negative unit less in valence. Gamma rays are like X-rays, but more penetrating. The presence of gamma rays from 30 milligrams of radium can be observed in an electroscope after passing through 30 centimetres of iron. For the artificial disintegration of the elements (or the stripping of an atom) the following projectiles have been used in atomic bombardments. Alpha particles, protons, neutrons, deuterons and electrons. In 1933 Jean Frédéric Joliot-Curie (1900 1958) and his wife, Irene Joliot-Curie, produced artificially radioactive substances by bombardments of aluminium and boron by alpha particles, and observed protons, neutrons and positive electrons (positrons). The above details will give you some idea of the weapons with which science attacks the atom. In chemical reaction matter is neither created nor destroyed, and the atom can be made to decompose only under the influence of processes involving enormous energies. although some decompose spontaneously. 
Dalton's laws based on experimental laws of conservation of mass, definite proportions, and multiple proportions, had to be modified on the basis of many of these discoveries. But as the decomposition of atoms does not occur in the ordinary chemical reactions the usefulness of the Dalton theory in chemistry is not impaired. It is now known that atoms of the same element often do not have the same atomic weight but may have several values which differ by several integral units from each other (isotopes). Since different isotopes usually occur in the same ratio, the atomic weight is still characteristic of the element. 
Among the substances which are recognised from their Mendeleyev-Moseley properties as chemical elements and which are not made up of atoms which are all of the same weight, is neon gas. The partial separation of isotopes of a given element has been successfully accomplished in neon, mercury, chlorine and hydrogen. 
We are penetrating gradually into the mysteries of matter as you will have noticed already, and by comparing that which science has discovered up to now with the Ancient Wisdom you will realise later on how the study of matter will lead inevitably to the Realms of the Spirit. We shall continue with the fascinating study of the atom and other things next week. 
In case any student should consider this particular Lecture contains too many technical details, your Masters beg to point out once more that this is a course of the study of Occult Science, and that the proper understanding of the material laws is essential to a proper understanding of the spiritual laws which follow later. A few readings of this and other Lectures will soon familiarise you with the different terms and their meanings. We would also add that, notwithstanding the great progress modern science has made since this Lecture was first written, its various theories regarding the atom are not correct. Nor is there any such thing as an 'up-to-date' truth as some of our newer members seem to think in the speculations of scientists, for if there were, it would not be a truth. Truth is eternal and never changes. You will be able to prove this for yourself as our Studies of this and other subjects develop and unfold. 
May the Light Illuminate your Mind. 
Your Hidden Master. 
