SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 5. 

Dear Disciple, 
Our last Lecture completed your first step on the Road to Freedom. There are twelve such steps in each of the first three Grades of our Studies. After each of these steps is completed you may write to us if you have any problems or messages in connection with our work. 
The fact that you are continuing with the Studies proves that you are interested, as we, your Masters, have every right to expect from a sincere student. Our reason for saying this is, that we are convinced there is no other Order in the world today that teaches its students from such a high intellectual standpoint as we do; nor has any Order so much to reveal to you as ours. This is not said in a criticising manner at all; we simply state a plain and undeniable fact. Nor do we question or discuss the merits or faults of any other Order or Group, or even mention any by name. Before you could have reached the stage of scientific unfoldment or discussion, or have had presented to you for examination the high Mystical and Occult Principles we have mentioned right from the beginning of our Studies, you might either have had to wait for years or never have had them explained to you at all. But this is by the way. Let us continue with our examination of matter in the light of everyday Science, so that we shall be able to understand also its hidden parts. 
The negative electric charge of an electron is extremely minute, but as each atom of any substance whatever has one or more of these electric charges you might think that the whole body or mass of a substance has a considerable charge of negative electricity. But this is not so, for it is only in exceptional cases that bodies of some substances are electrified. You will therefore, have already come to the conclusion that there must be positive charges in an atom as well, in order to neutralise the negative ones in electrons. It was shown by Lord Rutherford (1871 - 1937) that the positive charges of electricity in an atom are concentrated on a minute nucleus at the centre of the atom. 
Now you will remember what we said in our last Lecture about the positive nature of the Sun in our own Kosmos. Lord Rutherford compared the atom to our Solar System - or Kosmos — and based his theory on the fact that in our own Solar System we have the Sun as our central star, with nine planets revolving around it in elliptical paths or orbits. 
These planets are: Mercury - nearest to the Sun -- and then Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune and Pluto. We call all these planets the major planets here, for both Astronomical and Occult reasons, but there are two general ways in which they are usually classified. Mercury, Venus and Earth are frequently referred to as the inferior planets (although the mean diameter of Mars, in miles, is only 4,200, while Earth is 7,927 and Venus 7,500), and the others are called the superior planets. Another system of classification considers Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars as the minor or terrestrial planets, while Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune and Pluto are called the major planets. Why Pluto is included among the major planets is not explained (*See note at end). Its diameter in miles is estimated to be only 3,700, while Jupiter's is estimated to be 89,000, Saturn's 75,000, Uranus's 32,000 and Neptune's 31,000. 
According to Rutherford we must imagine an atom, despite its diminutive size, as a little universe in itself. We, in our own termin ology, compare it to a Kosmos, or Solar System, or Planetary System, while we regard the rest of the limitless number of other Solar Systems etc. as the Universe; although later on we shall see that there are countless numbers of such Universes too!! 
Each atom, then, is a minute planetary system with a central nucleus, or sun, of a positive nature, around which the negative electrons revolve as planets. The number of electrons in each atom varies from element to element, beginning with Hydrogen, which has but a single electron, or planet, revolving around its nucleus, or sun. Then we have Helium with two electrons, Lithium with three, and so forth, until by adding electrons one by one we reach Uranium with ninety-two electrons revolving around its nucleus. Now this is going to give us some very interesting speculations leading to Occult Secret Truths which have never been revealed before by anyone. 
In the first place we find that each atom is of a different material nature on account of the number of electrons it carries. We also compared the atom to a Kosmos, or solar or planetary system. It is a well-known Occult Law that no Solar System in the Universe is like another Solar System in any way, materially or otherwise. The constitution of every planet in each individual solar system is always the same, but the inhabitants of these different planets are never alike, nor do the general conditions of different planets resemble the others. 
Meteorites, meteors or ‘shooting stars' as they are called, are visitors from our own Kosmic Space, which, when they come into the atmosphere of the Earth with velocities from 24 to 240 kilometres per second (or 15 to 150 miles per second) are made visible by being raised to incandescence by the resistance offered by our atmosphere, and the composition of the fragments which have been found from time to time contain nothing which has not been previously found on earth. It is the same with the electrons in an atom. They are always of the same nature and composition, with certain exceptions to be discussed later. Generally speaking, the 76 electrons in an atom of Osmium will be all alike, but they will produce a totally different effect than the 83 electrons in an atom of Bismuth for instance. 
As below, so above. 
Our Solar System with its nine planets around the Sun is like a huge atom. This atom must therefore differ entirely from another atom (or Solar System) which has either more or fewer planets revolving about its Central Sun (or nucleus). 
Thus we prove once again that Occult Science is proved to be right by the findings of modern worldly Science, although the latter is not aware of this fact, and would probably pooh-pooh the whole theory if presented with it, just as Science has always scorned to be aided by the supreme knowledge of the Occult Sages throughout the last few centuries. 
But a still more interesting discovery is made if we compare the nature of an atom with nine electrons with the nature of our own Solar System with nine planets. The atom with nine electrons is that of Fluorine, which is a pale yellow gas, poisonous, very re-active, it combines with most other elements in the dark. It is the same as the material conditions of our own Solar System. 
Until a man has raised his mind to more spiritual things he lives in a condition of darkness. His material thinking combines with most other elements of materialism in its many and often hideous shapes and conditions, which may be called poisonous in many instances. We have only to look around us to know that this is true, and the necessity for freeing ourselves from these low conditions becomes more and more obvious according to the extent that our eyes are opened to the real conditions around us; conditions that are often absorbed by us, no matter how we struggle inwardly against the yellow poison gases of hatred, greed, envy, lust and other grievous characteristics of those who are still embedded in the morass of material slavery, ignorance and stupidity. 
For this reason we stated that by studying our first four Lectures you had taken the first step on the Road to Freedom. Now you are just commencing to take the second step by having the eyes of your inner and Higher Mind opened to some new aspects of Truth and Revelation, which will lead eventually to this Freedom of the Spirit. 
Perhaps some of these ideas are new to you and rather startling. It may be that you refuse to accept them, though we hope for your own sake that you will not scoff at them. These early teachings of ours contain the germs of mighty Truths, and later on you will be truly amazed — if you have not already had a great deal of instruction in such high matters — when you see how these Teachings unfold themselves. 
We predict that you will be amazed even if you have made a great study of these very things, for they are going to spread out in directions which you cannot realise at present. 
You are now requested to meditate deeply on our comparison of the various atoms with the different kinds of Solar Systems in the Universe. Use your gift of imagination to visualise the conditions found within the atoms with their huge number of planets whirling around their central Suns. Imagine what our Solar System might be like if we had 92 planets turning around our Sun, and realise that, no matter how densely material our own Kosmos is, a Solar System with 92 planets instead of our own nine must be of a material and spiritual density so great that it would be truly awful to be incarnated in such a Kosmos. Think also of the frightful and seemingly hopeless task it would be to have to struggle towards the Light when enmeshed in such dark and terrible conditions. Yet there are such planetary systems, and on their various worlds dwell living beings who must in the end work their way upwards toward less dense conditions. But what a long road it is! 
Imagine too a Kosmos with only One planet spinning around its Sun. If each atom is of the same size, how light and airy must be the interior of an atom of Hydrogen with only one electron, when compared with an atom of Uranium in which the 92 electrons are closely packed within the same space!! 
The same applies to a Solar System with only one planet in it, soaring free and untrammelled along its mighty orbit around its Sun, without the often destructive influences from other, planets to interfere with its glorious freedom. 
Here is food for thought sufficient for a lifetime; but continue also to meditate on Peace, Power and Secrecy. 
May the Lords of Light be with you, 
Your Hidden Master 
*When this lecture was last updated, we questioned Pluto's status as a 'major planet given its (then) estimated diameter of only 3,700 miles. In 1980 scientists 'recalculated its diameter to only 1,800 miles and have since reduced this even further to a mere 1,400 miles. We wonder if eventually they will reduce it to zero! Science consequently reclassified Pluto as a 'minor planet in 2006, although we read with amusement that some astronomers continue to regard it as a major planet. We will leave the scientists to fight poor Pluto's status out amongst themselves!! 
