SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 9. 

Dear Disciple, 
We may liken the comets to the particles used by Science in the forms of alpha, beta and gamma rays when the scientists bombard an atom by means of these rays. You know that the alpha and beta rays are slightly or largely deflected by the magnetic fields surrounding the nucleus of an atom, although on account of the huge number of particles from the alpha rays employed in a bombardment some hits are possible. 
The same thing happens when a comet approaches our Sun. It is deflected by the Sun's magnetic field, and it is also deflected by the magnetic fields of the planets. In the atom the alpha and beta rays are also deflected by the magnetic fields of the electrons. It is only when gamma rays are used in the bombardments of the atom that there is any degree of certainty that the particles of the gamma rays may register a direct hit upon the nucleus. If there were any inhabitants with the powers of perception living on an electron the particles from alpha, beta and gamma rays would present to them the same spectacle in the atomic heavens as the comets produce in our skies. 
Until quite recently Science considered all comets to be definite members of our Solar System. But in 1987 a comet was detected around Beta Pictoris, a main-sequence star 63 light years away. In May 2019 another two comets—now dubbed 'exocomets'—were discovered orbiting the same star. It is now thought there are many such outside our Solar System; we could have told the astronomers this had they asked us! 
It was not without reason that formerly (and even today) comets were and are regarded with awe as the bringers of misfortune and disaster. There is much more behind such 'superstitions' than Science can realise. Do you remember that we said that a bombardment of our Sun is possible, though not, very probable? The instincts of man are always based on actual inner knowledge of conditions and possibilities in Nature. When danger approaches, or when there is a manifestation of something that resembles danger, or even the unknown, those instincts are awakened. They are ancient memories of actual happenings in the far distant past, and such memories may be contained within the Higher Mind of man as relics of actual past experiences, or they may be warnings flashed from the World Soul to the Soul of man, and thence to his Higher Mind. We shall develop this theme later on in order to see more clearly the connection between Spirit and Matter, or between the Soul and the Higher and Lower Mind. 
We will now give you some suggestions for a new exercise, but you must continue to concentrate on Peace, Power and Secrecy in the meanwhile. The new exercise in question is the following: Go into a dark room when all is quiet and you cannot be disturbed by undue noise or movements, and at a time when nobody will come to interrupt you. Concentrate on Peace. Then close your eyes and try to see a colour with your eyes closed. You may commence with any colour you wish, but it is best to concentrate first on red, blue or yellow. Try to remember and see an article you know well with these colours. For red you may choose a tomato for instance, for blue the colour of the sky at noon when there are no clouds, and for yellow a lemon. You have seen these colours thousands of times in connection with the things mentioned. Think hard of them, one at a time. If you really are at Peace within and of a tranquil mind, and if you concentrate well you will suddenly see the thing you have in mind before you, or if not the thing itself, then its colour. Do not jump from one colour or article to another, but adhere to one only until you succeed. Fifteen minutes at a time will be sufficient. 
Suppose you commence with red and you cannot visualise it. Should this be the case, then, after your 15 minutes of concentration are over without any result, you should light a candle and place it three or four inches away from and in front of a piece of material of the same colour you have been trying to see in the dark, or of a similar colour. Coloured card is best for this purpose, and it can be obtained cheaply in many tints. Have the card, or whatever it is you are using, standing upright on a chair, or a table, leaning against a picture or a mirror, or anything else handy, with the lighted candle in front of you. Whatever colour you are practising on, you will see that between the material and the candle flame there will form a purplish haze; this haze may be seen around the flame of the candle too. Look at the coloured material behind the candle and concentrate on its colour for about three or five minutes. (Be careful that you do not place the candle too near the material so that you set it alight if there should be a draught). Now snuff (don't blow) out the candle. Close your eyes again, and in nine cases out of ten you will see the colour you could not obtain before in this way. Do not worry if the colour of the material seems to change to purple, mauve or violet during the time you have the candle alight. Should you still have difficulties and fail to visualise the colour you want to see, do the same thing the next night, and so on until you succeed. Once you can see the first colour at will in the dark you will find it easy to see the others. Do NOT practise seeing any colours just before you are going to sleep until we give you further instructions, for it might be dangerous. Colour vibrations are the means of attunement with other conditions than the one you dwell in during your conscious daily life. If you attune with colours without knowing what you are about you might (if you do it in bed before sleeping) attune with something undesirable. So be careful please, and never forget these instructions. You will be good enough to practise this exercise as often as you can until the end of the 13th lecture. Then — as you will have finished your third step in this Grade — you will be so kind as to give us a report of your success or otherwise in regard to this exercise. Please read over this lecture several times if needed, so that you will have all the details firmly fixed in your mind. This exercise is of the very greatest importance if you wish to develop your powers. You will need these powers of seeing later on. It is quite useless to attempt further exercises for development if you cannot perfect this first one, for all depends upon your success with it. 
We will now return once more to the transmutation of the elements. In order to effect this we have to bombard them with fast moving particles. You know that alpha particles which are emitted by radium can be used for this purpose. They are shot off from the nuclei of radium atoms, and they have two positive charges. Each alpha particle is therefore equivalent to two protons, and is the same as the nucleus of a Helium atom. When they are emitted by radium they have a speed of about 10,000 miles per second. They have therefore, the properties necessary for successful bombardment: small size, large mass and high speed. It is also possible to carry out bombardments with fast moving protons. A hydrogen atom consists of an electron revolving about a proton. We can get rid of the electrons by passing an electric discharge through a tube which contains traces of hydrogen. We want the protons to move at a considerable speed and so we attract them by means of a strong negative charge. The pull of the electric charge gives the protons an extremely high speed. Ordinary hydrogen atoms could not be used, because they have no charge and cannot therefore be accelerated in an electric field. 
Neutrons are the third kind of particle which can be used in bombarding the elements. If we bombard Beryllium with alpha particles neutrons are emitted. They are ejected with such a high speed that they can be used effectively in the bombardments of other elements. In some experiments slow neutrons were used; they were slowed down by letting them pass through solid paraffin. Some elements absorb slow moving neutrons. Boron atoms have been bombarded with alpha particles and transmuted into atoms of carbon, which is the next higher element on the atomic scale; during the process protons are emitted. It is evident that when there is a direct hit the Boron nucleus captures an alpha particle and emits a proton, that is, it gains two positive charges and loses one. The net gain of one positive charge raises the atom one place in the scale. Nowadays the two main projectiles used in the modern synchrotron and cyclotron accelerators are protons and electrons. 
Many other things may happen during these bombardments. An alpha particle may pass so close to a nucleus that it disturbs it, so that it emits a proton without capturing the alpha particle. There is therefore a loss of one positive charge to the nucleus; an atom of Boron, for instance, would move down one place and become an atom of Beryllium. When Beryllium is bombarded with alpha particles a direct hit results in the nucleus capturing the alpha particle and ejecting a neutron. The nucleus therefore gains two positive charges and so the atom Beryllium moves up two places and becomes an atom of carbon via the intermediate element Boron, for the ejected neutrons have no charges, as we have already told you, and so do not affect the identity of the atoms. 
If we wish to manufacture Gold the best metal to commence with is Mercury. The number of the element Mercury is 80; that of the element Gold is 79; so that if we can expel one proton from the nucleus of an atom of Mercury we have transmuted it into an atom of Gold. But this process is very difficult because there are 80 electrons whirling around the nucleus of an atom of Mercury, and all these 80 orbits have to be broken through as well as the magnetic field around the nucleus itself. In spite of all these difficulties the experiment was successfully carried out some years ago in Berlin. The bombarding particles were given a high speed by means of an electric field of high voltage, and a small, but observable quantity of gold was produced from quicksilver. 
Science has not yet been able to reproduce these minute laboratory transmutations on a commercial scale. Further knowledge of the structure of the nucleus may show whether large scale transmutations can be carried out at a sufficiently low price (see note below). 
Wishing you all success with your new exercise. 
Your Hidden Master. 
Note. Despite the great strides Science has made in its understanding of the atom since this lecture was first written more than 75 years ago, large scale, commercial transmutations still remain economically unviable. 
