SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 6. 

Dear Disciple, 
We trust that your continuous meditations on the three great Principles of Peace, Power and Secrecy are beginning to bear fruit, and that you have already observed a great inner balance of all your physical and intellectual properties. If you have really followed our advice to the letter such results must be evident by now. If you have failed to bear in mind the three important Principles up to now, try to do so in future, for upon your success with them depends the rest of your spiritual and intellectual progress. 
If you feel irritated at the small and really unimportant mishaps or misunderstandings which are the constant companions of all human beings, if you lose your temper when things do not work out so well as you might desire, if you have any feeling of unrest or fear within you, or if there is any other unpleasant sensation you are suffering from, you have failed in your attempts to attune with Peace — and the great Principle of Power is still far away from your grasp. You have then also failed in Secrecy, for one cannot consider a person capable of veiling the greater secrets of our Order when he is not strong enough to control his inner self to such an extent that the small troubles, at any rate, begin to fail to influence him in any way. By constant practise the greater — and in the end even the greatest — trials and tests will be overcome by the person who has truly acquired the PEACE within his Mind. Never forget for an instant to hold fast to that principle, for when later on we shall open the Portals of some of the deeper studies you will need Peace and Control if you wish to understand and master the great secrets. 
We will now discuss the atom a little further, for, as the whole of the Universe is dependent on ‘atoms' of all sizes, we must try to understand this most important division of the material to the best of our ability, in order to be able to extend our studies of matter later on. Before we do this we must give you advice about the following. Do not be disheartened if at first you fail from time to time, to hold on to Peace within, for we have all had the same experiences of failure in this respect; but if you persist in your efforts you will succeed in the end. 
Strong intellectual powers, combined with wide experience are needed to enable us to see beyond a seeming disaster. What may seem a trial at first sight is often the means of awakening our Inner Perceptions, and such tests are sent to us by the Wise Powers outside the material, and they should be regarded in the light of a sacred trust, and an indication that these Wise Beings, who guide and control certain with flesh the positive spirit within. (Remember later on that we only use this in the sense of an illustration, for the true properties of Soul, Higher and lower mind, etc., will be discussed in a different manner). 
Let us therefore use this positive force every second of the day in order to neutralise the negative conditions of our body and the material phenomena around us when these annoy or perplex us. Let us be aware of this inner power continually; let it never be out of our thoughts, for it is an attribute given to us by our wise Creators for the purpose of controlling our destinies as well as our surroundings. Never forget that inner power, for by always being aware of it you will fan it into greater life; a life of positive spiritual freedom and happiness that cannot be overcome by negative and material things, thoughts and conditions. Nay, these will be repelled by the great Light within you, if you can learn to follow our advice. 
In 1913 H.G.J. Moseley cleared up the last discrepancies in Mendeleyev's table. He demonstrated that the atoms of each particular element possessed a specific number of electrons (consequently indicating the number of positive charges on the nucleus), and that the number of electrons contained by each atom designated the atomic number. He thus completed the whole table, marking each of the 92 elements (including the gaps) so that each element was put into place 
by its atomic number, doing away with any awkward and unexplained anomalies. As we now know there are more elaborate elements with higher numbers than 92. but they still follow the same pattern as indicated by the table. However, we continue to refer to 92 elements because. so far as is known, uranium, the element 92, is the heavies found in a natural state. 
Science now directed its attention to the nucleus or Sun of the planetary system within the atom. In our own planetary system our Sun has a mass 750 times as great as that of all the rest of the planets put together. Science states that it is this great mass at the centre of our Kosmos that holds the planets in their orbits or paths, and prevents them from flying off into Space. Science puts this down to the force of gravity which is supposed to hold the whole system together. Despite the 'breakthrough' widely reported in the press and media in 2016 that scientists had detected so-called 'gravitational waves', you will learn later on that Science is completely wrong in this respect (see note at end). You will learn that there are quite different forces which hold our planetary system together, and you will also learn why the planets cannot fly off into space under any conditions. Science further states that in the atom it is the attraction between the positively charged nucleus and the negatively charged electrons which keep them to their orbits. This is also wrong as will be explained later. Science also says that the electrons do not fall into the nucleus for the same reason that the planets do not fall into the Sun; it says that in each case the forward movement prevents them falling to the centre towards which they are attracted. But it does not say, nor does it know, what causes the movements of either planets or electrons! Your Masters will give you the truths about these secrets in due course. 
The nucleus of an atom is extremely small (from our point of comparison), but massive. The mass of an electron is only 1/1836th part of the mass of a hydrogen atom. The remainder of the mass is concentrated in the nucleus. 
We should expect that there would be some sort of structure in the nucleus, answering to similar characteristics in all cases, otherwise we should be driven back to the conception of 92 kinds of nuclei in order to arrive at the 92 different elements, whereas, as we have already told you, it is only the combination of electrons and their number in each atom that produces the various elements. If each nucleus were of a different nature we should be confronted with the same difficulty we have met before in the case of the particles. The nucleus then, of any atom, no matter of which of the elements, is always the same in every 
instance. The notable components making up the body or mass in the centre of the atom are the protons and the neutrons (around which the negative electrons orbit). Science is still exploring the nucleus and to date has discovered and classified over one hundred previously unsuspected sub-atomic particles and admits that its complete make-up still remains a mystery. However, the majority of the 'fundamental particles', as they are called, need not concern us at the moment, and we will confine our studies in this field to the main 'features' and basic construction and behaviour of the atom. We will though make mention of some of these sub-atomic particles from time to time. 
Many of the above mentioned components of the atom were discovered by means of 'bombardment. This is done by directing a beam of neutrons or high-energy particles at the nucleus, thus bombarding it with these missiles. Originally this was achieved with an electron gun - a negatively charged tube with a source of electrons at one end. Over the years such instruments have developed into vast, sophisticated accelerating machines. As the nucleus is extremely small, and as moreover it is surrounded by rapidly moving electrons, we cannot expect many direct hits, for it is necessary to break up the electrons by this bombardment before we can have free access to the nucleus. Moreover the nucleus is always surrounded by a magnetic field which is sufficiently powerful to divert some of the minute particles used as projectiles. But fortunately we are able to use billions of particles, and a vast number of targets in our bombardments, and these are of sufficient numbers to secure a number of direct hits and to give observable results. At first it was found that the nucleus contained at least two kinds of particles, one of which has a positive charge equal to the negative charge of an electron, and this particle was called a proton. The second particle has the same mass as a proton but it has neither a positive nor a negative charge; therefore it was called a neutron. When in 1939 the physicists of Columbia University in the U.S.A. split the atom of uranium, they succeeded in doing so by bombarding it with neutrons. 
Neutrons were first recognised by Chadwick as the results of the impact of alpha rays from radium upon the element beryllium. Other particles called positrons (positive electrons), were first observed by Dr. Carl D. Anderson by means of their ionisation tracks in the air of a cloud chamber, which is an enclosure containing air or gas saturated with water vapour. 
In 1935 it was suggested by the Japanese scientist Yukawa that there was another kind of particle that may occur in the nuclei of atoms. It was again Anderson who discovered a similar particle to that predicted and he called it a meson; it had the same charge as an ordinary electron but the mass was about 200 times as great; however, it did not quite fît all the requirements, and it was not until after World War II that two more of these particles were found, one of which was dubbed a mu-meson (muon for short) and identified as the particle Anderson had already found; the other, called a pi-meson (pion), was considered to be Yukawa's particle. These were first observed in connection with cosmic rays, which have great penetrating power and reach the earth from outer space. Work continues in this field of research at all the big accelerator laboratories such as the Stanford Linear Accelerator, U.S.A. and at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), located beneath the Franco Swiss border near Geneva, Switzerland, etc. 
It is now recognised that electrons, neutrons, and other particles possess wave characteristics with a frequency and a wavelength. 
Next week we will continue the discussion of this very important subject. 
NOTE: As we update this Lecture in 2016, scientists working at the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO, in the United States, claim to have discovered 'gravitational waves.' This is another of those 'monumental breakthroughs' Science is continually crowing about, which is big on speculations but small on facts. What they actually observed was the very faint sound of two theoretical objects known as black holes making a very faint noise, described as a 'chirp', or 'whoop', that lasted just 0.2 seconds! What we believe they may have detected, and similar previous experiments might have detected too, are the magnetic lines of force which surround all material things, arising from the movement and interaction of electrically-charged bodies. Consequently, we advise all our Students to take all such pronouncements with a large pinch of salt. 
With brotherly greetings, 
Your Hidden Master. 
