SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 2. 

Dear Disciple, 
The Masters of our Order trust that you have followed the advice contained in the previous Lecture, and that you have derived much benefit from your concentrations upon the three Principles of Peace, Power and Secrecy. We will now consider these Principles a little closer and, commencing with Peace, we must first of all emphasise that this has nothing to do with political aspects of the word, and that it does not refer to any movements or groups who take this word as a slogan or as an excuse to evade military or any other duties to their Nation – whichever that Nation is. 
We are not concerned with politics or political groups or movements of any sort but only with our studies of Natural and Occult Universal Laws. Nor are we concerned with the word Peace in a religious or ceremonial sense, such as the hebdomadal offerings and symbolical calculations like those referred to in chapter 23 of Leviticus, where we may read of the 'sheaf of the wave offering and the ‘offer with the bread (of) seven lambs without blemish', in connection with the peace offerings of the seven sabbaths of the Mysteries. No — we are here concerned with the Inner Peace which passeth all (worldly) under standing; a peace which can only be attained by the rigorous control of the turbulent principles of the human body, or lower mind. 
This is the very first and the most difficult step for the student who wishes to attain Mastership. As long as he allows himself to be swayed by the emanations which issue forth from the minds of others he is not anywhere near the goal of mastery of himself. You are beginning to realise already that this very simple principle about which you and everyone else has heard so much is not so simple after all; especially if you have noted your many failures in this respect last week. 
How then can we obtain that much desired control of self, you will ask? We can still our minds by isolating ourselves in some way most suitable to each and by entering into a condition of Silence. We may go into a park, or into the country if we can for an hour or for any time we can spare, and in that place — wherever it is — we can quieten our thoughts and think of anything that we, each in a different manner, consider the most ideal conception of really peaceful conditions and attitudes of mind. We can go to a museum or Art Gallery, or even stand in front of a shop window containing any sort of thing we consider beautiful. We can sink our outer personality and our inner thoughts to the point of utter forgetfulness of self into such things that appeal most to us on account of the splendour which is contained in any form of art, in jewellery, in a lovely rose, or any other flower, in the grace that abounds in a bird or a young animal, a sunrise, a sunset, a moonlit sky, or anything else you may think beautiful. Then we must carry away with us the picture of that particular thing or being and keep it in our mind. We must think of it from time to time, see it again with the mind's eye, and recall the pleasure and the Peace it gave us when we first beheld it. This is a very simple exercise which we can practise almost anywhere and at any time, and it will be of great benefit to us in many ways. Not only shall we thus learn to attain to a peaceful condition of mind, but we shall also raise our thoughts to a level above the ordinary material things of life. Without realising it at first, we shall take the first step towards the spiritual, for beauty in any form is always a material reflection of a spiritually ideal proto-type, which exists in a realm of less density than the earthly, dense, material plane in which we are dwelling at present; prisoners anxious to escape, whether we are aware of it or not. 
But we must not become dreamers on account of our efforts to pacify our minds by trying to raise it a step above ordinary life. It is essential that we learn to understand the beautiful and peaceful conditions of a higher world and yet retain our grip on the conditions of earthly life in which we have been placed in order to learn certain material things and to carry out certain duties to ourselves and others. We can do this if we practise it continually, and this endeavour will bring a feeling of joy as well as Peace and a proper appreciation of beauty. You see — the principle of Peace is beginning to expand already into other good things! And when we begin to obtain that grip we have just mentioned our sense of Power will increase at the same time. 
But now we must give you another warning hint. Many students of Mysticism and the Occult are apt to be so overcome with the experiments they have at the commencement of the studies in attunement with the higher principles, that they take themselves too seriously and become too introspective and enthusiastic. Instead of being filled with a calm sense of peace, beauty and power they become excited about their discoveries in new and strange realms, and so they attain to unrest. Instead of becoming happy they become mournful and sad, and they turn away in disgust from the often ugly side of material conditions. This is wrong, very wrong, and you will say at once that this is very obvious and that you, yourself, would never make the same mistake. But do not be too sure!! We have known a large number of disciples who all stumbled at the threshold in just this very manner. Unless you can keep a very definite control of all your thinking and your aspirations you too may fail at first. As long as there is any thought of sadness or discontent in your mind, or any unrest, you have failed in your efforts to find PEACE.....that very simple Principle. Not having found Peace you have no Power either! So be very careful please. 
Now we must regard the Principle of Secrecy once more, for that is also extremely important. When you have a secret such as we discussed last week, and which you must ever protect from the eyes of all persons not connected with us, you should be careful not to adopt too mysterious a manner! Here again we have known and still know a number of students who were so overcome with the weighty secrets with which they had just become acquainted that they slunk about like so many mysterious copies of Guy Fawkes and his sad gang of conspirators; and their friends, who were not in the secret, began to wonder if all was well with them!! Be warned therefore by these examples and do not give way to the temptation to appear more mysterious than you really are. And when you know some of the really great secrets you will have lost all desire to give any hint whatsoever to the world in general of your wisdom, for by that time you will have acquired control. 
We must mention these things, because they are real traps into which even the best of us may fall. When the time for the Revelation of the really great mysteries arrives you will all be used to that greater control of all your faculties and you will have a much wider outlook, enabling you to accept the Laws of Nature and the Occult as and when they are made clear to you in a manner calculated not to upset your balance. But we must train ourselves right from the beginning to accept all the secrets with a calm, peaceful and powerful Mind and an intelligent understanding. 
We advise you to read and study the first two Lectures several times very carefully indeed, and to ponder deeply over the Principles discussed therein. There is much more in them than meets the eye at a first or even a tenth reading, and we are sure that even in this second Lecture you may have already found one or two things that are slightly different from your previous conceptions about these matters. If you have not yet discovered them, look again! 
We also hope that you will be able to commence forming your first Group, so that you may be able to demonstrate to yourself in a practical manner the great Principle connected therewith. We will now recapitulate the Principles we are studying by means of our meditations upon them. 
They are: 
• Peace 
• Power by Group formation 
• Secrecy 
• Discretion in selecting friends for your Group, 
• Harmonious conditions caused by the positive radiations 
created by such Groups. 
• Balance of your inner faculties leading to greater vitality and 
intellect. 
• Stilling your Mind by the contemplation of beauty in any form. 
Practical and sensible behaviour and attunement with joy, which is a Positive Force, whilst sadness is a negative condition. 
Remember also that although you do not know any of the Masters in the flesh, that they may know you and watch you in order to see if you are possibly one of those Disciples we shall need later on in the Greater Work. These Masters may meet you casually at any place and at any hour, but you will not be aware of their identity until the time comes when they will reveal themselves to you. They know the secret of how to remain hidden, although perfectly visible at all times!! And they also know how to be present though unseen!!! 
We mentioned certain Honours in connection with the formation of Groups. These Honours will be made known to each Disciple as and when he or she has completed their first Group of three, seven or twelve Students (including themselves) as indicated in last week's Lecture and in our Manifesto. However, we wish to make it quite clear that such Honours have nothing whatsoever to with the 'awards' and 'titles' handed out to business people, celebrities and the like. They serve a deeper and more important purpose. We also wish to reiterate that the formation of such Groups is entirely optional, and that students who for whatever reasons are not able to form a Group are not disadvantaged in their Studies in any way, nor is this any reflection upon their abilities or worthiness. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master 
