SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 14. A Special Message from Antares; Hierophant of The Order 

Beloved Student, 
In this, our first direct Message to you in connection with one of the most important Mystical and Occult Principles, we want to say a few words about Charity — in other words with regard to Service, for if the Mystic knows the true Laws about Service and Charity, and carries out these Laws in an expert and masterly manner, he will accumulate great Powers unto himself. 
WHAT IS CHARITY? 
Is it an ill regulated and sentimental way of so-called “Brotherly Love"? Does it consist of a lavish or even a restricted giving of alms, lending money to the needy, or rendering anyone any service he or she may demand of you? 
Does its merit lie in subscribing in a large or small way to any Funds for the purpose of running hospitals, dogs or cats homes, almshouses, or whatever else makes demands on your good nature and your pocket? Talleyrand once said that: “There are some services so great that they can only be repaid by ingratitude.” He might have gone further and said that all forms of inexpert Charity and Service are always repaid by ingratitude. That would have proved him to be a true expert. 
Real Charity is none of these, nor do many people know what it really is. If a person comes to tell you that he needs money for this, that, or the other, because he has gotten himself into some sort of a mess, and you give or lend him that which he demands of you, you do him and yourself a wrong. No person on earth can help another person in this way. This applies especially to those who make a profession of begging by sending you heart breaking appeals for assistance. The more heart breaking their appeals are the less you should trust them! This may seem to you a hard saying, but it is nevertheless based on a solid foundation of wide experience of all sorts of Charity and Service and a Knowledge of their Secret LAWS. 
There are actually very few persons who can be helped by lending or giving them money, and no matter how rich the lender or giver is he can seldom afford to grant the desires of those who want to receive money from him in this way. 
Why do we say this? 
Firstly: If a person comes to you for monetary assistance it is generally the first of an unending series of similar appeals from the same one. The maws of the money-hungry are never filled in this manner, and he who lends money to a friend loses both in the end as a rule. 
Secondly: By relieving temporarily the need of the beggar or borrower you shoulder his burden, and you encourage him to lean on you or on others equally good-natured, so that he will lose that necessary driving power and the will to fight his own battles in order to fulfil his destiny. This is a great responsibility for you, and it can seldom be recommended that you take on such a responsibility. 
Thirdly: Few people can come to you and truly say that they have a claim on your good nature so far as monetary help is concerned. Just think for a few moments—and lay down this Lecture while you search your mind — of all the relatives, friends and acquaintances you have, and then come to an unbiased and practical conclusion by sorting out from all the people you know the ones who may come to you for monetary help and who have a real claim to it. 
Have you done so? 
Be frank; and admit that there are very few indeed. 
We are not concerned at this moment with the Laws of the Universal Brotherhood of Man. That is quite another thing. We want to know who has a real claim for help on us out of all the people we know — near or far. 
It is true that when a person comes to you to borrow money that you make an enemy of such a one if you grant him his wish. He may not show it, but inwardly he will resent it that you are in a more powerful position than he is himself. He will feel your kindness to be a burden, and the longer it will take him to pay you back (if he is an honest borrower) the more unbearable the burden will become. It takes a truly great-hearted man to borrow money without resenting the help; he must be immeasurably greater than the man who helps him, and much more generous! This is not a paradox — it is a FACT. 
If the borrower is not honest he will try to escape repaying you in some way, by constantly pleading poverty for instance (and asking for more if you are soft-hearted enough), or he will disappear altogether. Whatever you give or lend him will be swallowed up in a bottomless abyss; if we may be permitted to double the strength of the noun by means of the added adjective in a manner of speaking. 
We know hosts of kind people connected with Charitable Organisations who spend much time and money in their generous endeavours to help others. We know larger numbers still of those who have been helped by such good people; but we regret to say that of those who have benefited by such Charities there is not one in a hundred who has a good word to say behind the backs of his generous but ill advised helpers. On the contrary; all they have to give in return for the kindnesses received are sneers as a rule. We shall not be surprised if you are surprised to learn this, but it is true, nevertheless. 
What then, is Charity based on Scientific Occult Laws? 
We will try to explain it to you. 
The first and most important rule is that the dispenser of Charity must never be known! In this we show you another aspect of the Law of Secrecy; that very great Principle and Power. 
The second rule is that unless you know all the circumstances which have led up to the need for Charity in every individual case you should refrain from helping. This implies that you must know the person you mean to help well, or have him recommended to you by a person or persons you can absolutely trust. 
The third rule is that very little can be done by means of money in the majority of cases. There are instances when the spending of money is imperative of course; but in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred you will find that there are other — and better — means of coming to the aid of a person in distress. In the case of sickness you may provide a doctor and pay him for his services and anything else needed, or you may get the patient into a home or a hospital and give that a donation or any other form of payment. But remain behind the scenes! 
In cases of actual starvation you may have food sent. But remain unknown as the sender! 
In the two above instances you should keep an eye on your subjects, and when the patient is recovered find him some work if he needs it, jobs can always be found if you really try. In the starvation case the same advice holds good. Remain unknown! But try to get the person some work if they are not beyond it. 
When a person is in trouble on account of business depression you will have to find out what the cause of the trouble is. If the business is in a defunct condition on account of material, political, mechanical or other changes, the pouring into it of money is useless. If you are in a position to do so, divert some new stream of business to the man in trouble, and if he is worthy he will succeed in that. But stay hidden. A word of recommendation to one of your business friends may help to put the man on his feet again. But ask your friend not to mention your name! 
These are but a few examples of what you can do; hundreds of others will present themselves to you as you proceed along the thorny path of life. 
Charity if handled efficiently, is one of the greatest and finest means to acquire material benefits and power for yourself. Each act of charity brings its own reward, if we know what we are doing. You are entitled to such rewards, for they will be prizes gained by you in connection with the Wisdom you have acquired by studying this and other Laws. When you perform material acts of Charity in the right way you attune with the spiritual powers of Love, Goodwill, Kindness and Affection. 
This will bring you in contact with other persons who possess these powerful attributes of the Spirit, for they will be drawn towards you as being of their kindred, and this again will increase the conditions of your material success and well-being; as you have protected others in the right way so will you find protection when you need it—but its Source will be hidden, for you will not be able to find out just how the Laws have been set in operation. And you will have completed the Holy Symbol of the Circle: from the material to the spiritual and via spirit back to matter. 
ANTARES, 
Supreme Grand Master. 

