SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 10. 

Dear Disciple, 
We have, in our previous Lectures, learnt a few of the peculiarities of the atom, and we have seen how it is constructed, but there are further possibilities inasmuch that the atoms of the same element vary amongst themselves at times and, as in the case of the isotopes, which have been wholly or partially separated by Science, we have an especially spectacular example in the case of the atom of hydrogen. Any sample of pure water from any part of the world has exactly the same composition, and the same properties as any other sample. All have the same boiling point, the same melting point, and all samples of water dissolve the same proportions of the various solids, and so forth. Hydrogen can be decomposed in every instance by passing through it an electric current, and there is no observable difference between the results of this current in the various samples of hydrogen from whatever part of the world it comes. Yet there are three different kinds of hydrogen! However, they are all so thoroughly mixed that all samples of hydrogen are alike. 
There is the largest amount of hydrogen with one proton as the nucleus of each atom (protium); a very small amount of hydrogen with a proton and a neutron as a nucleus (deuterium); and finally a minute quantity of hydrogen consisting of a proton and two neutrons (tritium). 
The proportion of the second kind of hydrogen (deuterium), that with a proton and a neutron, is only that of 1 in 6,500. It weighs about twice as much as protium, the most general form of hydrogen, on account of the added neutron, but both have the same properties (apart from those dependent on weight) because each has a single positive charge on the nucleus. Deuterium forms what is called heavy hydrogen and accounts for approximately 0.015% (alternately, on a weight basis: 0.031%) of all naturally occurring hydrogen in the oceans on Earth. 
When an electric current is passed through water, the water is split up into oxygen and hydrogen. These gases are given off, but the lighter hydrogen is given off more rapidly, in proportion to its quantity, than the heavy hydrogen. If the electric current is left running for weeks or months there is a slow concentration of heavy hydrogen in the small amount of water that is left. Almost pure heavy hydrogen, free from the lighter isotope, can be obtained in this manner and the separation of the two kinds of hydrogen is possible because of the great difference between the densities of the two isotopes, as one has twice as much density as the other. The heavy water, composed of oxygen and heavy hydrogen, differs considerably from ordinary water, for it melts at a higher temperature, 3.8°C instead of 0°C, and it boils at 101.42° instead of 100°C. This heavy water has poisonous properties, for tadpoles die in it and seeds do not germinate. But it is not a poison that endangers human life, for if it is taken internally the water in the body quickly dilutes it and it becomes harmless. Deuterium makes possible the extended study of chemical structure and reaction, and it is specifically used in isotopic 'labelling' experiments. 
The third and heaviest isotope of hydrogen called tritium, which has two neutrons in addition to the single positive proton; is radio active. It does exist in a natural state, but only in infinitesimal quantities (only one tritium atom in 107 of hydrogen); however, it can be made artificially in nuclear reactors, and is used extensively in radiobiology. 
The chemical composition of water has been the subject of intensive studies from the early years of the science of chemistry, and before. One of its peculiarities is that it can be heated above 100°C without boiling, even to 180°, but on further heating violent explosions may occur. It may also be cooled below 0°C without freezing, but on further cooling it congeals with increase of volume, exerting great force when confined in a small space, as was shown also with ordinary ice in the case of the 12 feet thick wall of a castle near the town of Dijon in France which had been standing solid against the centuries for over a thousand years. In the early days of 1940 this wall blew up with a violent detonation that was heard far away. The cause was about half-a-pint of water which had trickled into a fissure near the wall's foundation and had frozen there during the winter. Then it expanded in the thaw and burst like a paper bag, the great mass of masonry. 
Water occupies a distinct position among liquids in the matter of dissolving gases, liquids and solids. While there are other liquids that exceed it in solvent power in specific cases, no other shows such a wide range and general intensity of solvent power. Many chemical reactions take place in water as the solvent medium, and many of these occur in stantaneously. Water of the ocean, containing dissolved salts, covers 73% of the surface of the earth; water of lakes (fresh and salt) and rivers forms an important portion of the land surface; water vapour of the atmosphere is a constituent affecting climate and plant growth; snow and ice of mountain tops serve upon melting as regional water supplies, and snow and ice of the polar regions determine ocean currents and climate; while underground water is an industrial and agricultural source of water supply. Water stands alone in its importance to plant and animal life, and to industry. 
When we talk of water, or of any gas, we must never lose sight of the fact that we are talking of material things. A gas is as material as a rock; the only difference lies in the density. Compared with Spirit, the lightest known gas (hydrogen) is still a solid! 
Yet both spirit and matter are subject to vibrations. The difference and the similarity of these two opposites is therefore apparent at once. If we consider for a moment the scale of vibrations, from 32 vibrations per second (which is the cause of a musical tone and a colour, and the lowest note, C, the average human ear can distinguish) to the high vibration which is caused by the squeak of a small bat (which is the highest tone the average human ear can hear — and many people cannot detect even that sound), we shall see that we occupy but a small portion of the great Cosmic scale insofar as the human sense of hearing is concerned. The same applies in a similar way to seeing, smelling, tasting and feeling. We are placed in the centre of these Cosmic vibrations. Below us stretch the deep regions of great density and slow vibrations, and above we have the finer regions, trilling at rates of vibrations mankind cannot conceive. There are the two opposites, above and below; and we on the earth-plane are at the centre, partaking of both! 
Here is 'the real difference between these entirely opposite Principles, as well as the manner in which they are interwoven', as we state in the second sentence of our Manifesto under the heading Grade 1 (page 8). 
How to distinguish, disentangle and use the threads of this mighty Web of Vibrations, spun by Father-Mother God, is the quest on which we have commenced. We can find our way through this maze only by means of a deeper knowledge of the material (as we have already stated and cannot repeat too often) than most people possess. 
What is Matter? 
We can say by way of illustration that Matter is a lower octave of Spirit. It reflects a higher octave and rings with it in sympathy, just as a note struck on a piano, when you press down the loud pedal with your foot and keep it down, will cause its higher and lower harmonics to sound forth. These harmonics, especially the higher ones, can be heard by anyone who takes the trouble to try the experiment and who listens by tuning his ear to the interior part of the piano whilst holding down the note struck with his finger and the loud pedal with his foot. First you will detect the harmonic note an octave above the pitch of the note you have struck, then the one a fifth above the octave, and so on until the sounds are lost in the highest realms and cannot be followed by the sense of hearing any further. 
Here you have a good exercise for developing your sense of hearing. Nearly everyone has access to a piano in some way if he really tries. If you do not, any instrument with strings that vibrates will do just as well, such as a second-hand acoustic guitar. Add this exercise to the one we gave you last week on seeing; the two exercises go well together and the last one is just as important for the development of your faculties as the one last week. 
Are you now beginning to see the drift of our present Studies? Are you beginning to realise how we propose to lead you from the middle region (the earth) to the higher Realms? Can you see the implied suggestions with regard to the lower regions? There is much food for deep thought in all this, and if you are what we hope you are, you will have in this tenth week of your studies already a great revelation; such a revelation as you have never thought of before in all probability. It is this, and other revelations of a very high nature, that will lead to your eventual Illumination!! And there is no other Order in the world today that can teach you this Ancient Wisdom in the same manner that we teach it. This is said with the deepest sense of humility and it is not to be regarded as an idle boast or a cheap form of advertisement. 
When you hear much said about the marvels of Ancient India, Chaldea, Egypt and Greece in regard to the Mystery Schools of those seats of Ancient learning you should always remember that not everything that comes from these far away times (and yet so near) is of great and marvellous value. In those ancient days there were as many quacks, pretenders, witch doctors, swindlers who posed as great spiritual beings, fake mediums, fortune-tellers, so-called astrologers, and others of a similar ilk, as there are today and always have been. 
But in each Clime and in each age of the long forgotten centuries there was always but one Real Mystery School, where the true Adepts and Masters gave of their Divine Wisdom to a few of the chosen in the Inner Circle, and those select few carried on the work in their turn, until the time came when Barbarians overran the world, when the black hordes rose up from the deeps and destroyed all that was good.....for as far as they could in their evil lusts and hatreds. Mostly all of the Teachers and their disciples were slain; a few fled away to the solitudes of the deserts and mountain ranges. It is these few Holy Men who have kept the secrets of the great Arcana, and passed them on in secret to a select few. In each generation of man there have always been a few of the chosen ones. In each incarnation they returned, rich with the Old Wisdom, but unable to give it to the world at large on account of its gross materialism and indifference to the Holy things of the Spirit. 
And now, our dear Disciple and Fellow Student we are passing on to you some of the sublime and inspired Teachings. May the Light of illumination blaze forth within you in due time. 
Your Hidden Master. 
