SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 16. 

Dear Disciple, 
You may have wondered when reading our previous lectures who are the Authorities that state the Occult Laws you have been introduced to so far. Thomas à Kempis has said: “Search not who spoke this or that, but mark what is spoken”. This is a very wise remark made by a very wise man. Mark that which is spoken! It happens so very often alas, that a Teacher gives forth a Holy Truth, but how many of those who deign to listen to his or her words mark, heed and inwardly digest that which he or she has just uttered in their Wisdom? The majority of mankind are blind and deaf to Truth. When they see it or hear it they do not know it as Truth. It is with most Teachings as with pieces of money; those of the least value generally circulate the best. 
But there is a reason for this blindness and deafness; for this inability to discern real gold amongst the artificial glitter of worthless imitations with which the world of thinking beings is filled to suffocation. That is why the Sacred Truths have been hidden from the average man; he is not capable of distinguishing them from worldly Illusions; His inner Principles are not sufficiently developed to attune with Truth; he has a long way to go before he can be ready to sit at the feet of the Masters and imbibe Holy Truth. The Occult Scientific Teachings you are studying with us come from the very far past; they were first given out and fixed for ever in the lost continent of Atlantis. In those remote times, much farther away than you may realise now, there were the Great White Teachers, the White Magicians, who had their own select circles of worthy students of the Arcane Mysteries. Nothing was hidden from their Wisdom, which was kept absolutely secret, for mankind as a whole was no more ready for it than it is today. When we go into the Sacred History of those times you will be truly astonished. Those Teachers knew all the secrets of the Creations of the Gods, and they knew that as God created so can Man create! 
Given a certain intensity of Will, the shapes created by the Mind become subjective. This has been proved by numbers of our advanced students. 
The average ignorant Scientist calls these shapes hallucinations, for although they are real to their creators, as real as an ordinary visible object is to anyone else, only the creator of such psychic things or beings can see them (or also those sufficiently developed to attune with him, or others and their creations). When he attains a more intense and intelligent concentration of this Will, the forms become more concrete and they then become objective in a more general sense, 
so that almost anyone can see them; the man has then learned the Secret of Secrets: he has become a MAGICIAN. 
Even the materialist should not object to this logic, for he regards thoughts as matter. Conceding this to be true, the cunning mechanism contrived by the inventor; the fairy scenes born in the poet's mind; the gorgeous painting limned by the artist's fancy; the peerless statue chiselled by the sculptor in the ether; the palaces and castles built in the air by the architect — all these, though invisible and subjective must exist, for they are matter, contrived, shaped and moulded by the Mind. Who shall say then, that there are not some men of such imperial Will as to be able to drag these air-drawn images and imaginations into view, enveloped in the hard casing of gross substance to make them tangible? 
So we see that it is Will, the Will of the sublime Creator, which sets in motion the atoms which form and reform in endless combinations in order to build each object of the Creator's imagination and make it perceivable in the material worlds, where material beings, who are themselves created in a similar fashion, and endowed with Spirit, can behold the wonders of material nature, made visible to them by means of that mechanism called the animal body, which translates to the Higher and lower minds, via the material senses, that which these senses attune with. They behold, hear or feel a reflection of the Spiritual Divine Idea, or prototype, made an object of material sensatory perception; and that reflection seems real to them for so long as they are imprisoned within their animal bodies. That this 'imprisonment' is a fact has been proved millions of times by those who have, by means of extension of consciousness or by astral projection, escaped for longer or shorter periods from the material body whilst fully conscious. During deep and undisturbed sleep everyone, men and animals, is freed from the body automatically; and there is nothing mysterious or dangerous about it, it is quite a natural function of the Higher Mind. (Even animals have traces of this Higher Mind, but the subject is very intricate and we shall refer to it again several times in future in various ways which may seem slightly contradictory at first, as there are so many principles involved, but will become clear to you in the end). 
Plato himself hints (in Phædo, para.16) at a ceremony used in the Mysteries, during the performance of which the neophyte was taught that men are in this life in a kind of prison, and those neophytes were taught how to escape from it temporarily. We know this secret, of course, and will teach it to you at the right time, and when you have acquired the real powers of Peace and Control, and after you have learned how to attune properly with the hidden regions, and when you 
know how to defend yourself from all lower vibrations within yourself and without. 
It is necessary to learn with the aid of a powerful Will and Mind to purify yourself from all contact with the lower vibrations of matter in order to have at your command the blind life-forces within the Universe, or nature, as we know it as humans. Once you can do this you may demonstrate the principles with the help of ordinary things, such as any plants, grass or weeds, which you can then force into rapid growth. You may also use the principles by directing the life-essence to those who are ill; but the time for this is not yet. 
Some Occult Orders commit the grave error of instructing their Students in 'would-be' healing exercises which often have the opposite effect from those aimed at. Out of the many thousands of members of such Orders whom we know personally there are only a very few who can send healing to others by contact, or in the manner of ‘absent healing' — and they have discovered a technique all their own, because they are used by the Greater Powers beyond the Earth-plane on account of their purity, peacefulness and vitality. 
Before we can direct the life-essence we must have control. If you — our dear Disciple — know a number of Occult Students in one or more Orders, just ask yourself how many of them you consider to be in full control of their mental, physical and spiritual faculties, and truly at Peace within. Thus you will find a confirmation of what we have just said. Would you entrust any of those bewildered and misguided seekers with the healing of one who is very near and dear to you? No; if you thought the matter over very carefully you would go to the nearest doctor instead, who is at any rate fully trained in his profession, and should be an expert as regards all physical disorders. And you would be wise. Never attempt any healing without having the services of a Doctor of Medicine as well, for you would be committing a serious crime. Anyhow, we have not yet arrived at the point from which we will give you full instructions about mystical or occult healing processes. 
We must now say a few more words about the atom, for we are approaching the end of that subject so far as its technicalities are concerned. Molecules can be distorted by pressure, or by means of electric or magnetic fields; but atoms put up an enormous resistance to compression. You know that molecules of water consist of two hydrogen atoms attached to an oxygen atom. In ordinary water the molecules are so closely packed that water is not easily compressed. It is only when water is subjected to very high pressure that an observable compression is registered. The limit of compression appears to be the point at which there are no gaps between the atoms. No amount of pressure seems to have any effect in reducing the size of the atoms themselves. 
The molecules of water are most tightly packed when the water is at 4°C; at this temperature water is at its densest. There is a very slight swelling out when the water freezes; the molecules need this extra room to arrange themselves in the rigid solid form. If we put extra pressure on the ice we can force the molecules together and so compel the water to resume its liquid form, even though its temperature may be considerably below freezing point. If we release the pressure the water suddenly expands once more into ice. 
This explains a phenomenon called regelation discovered by Faraday. If we hang a copper wire across a block of ice, and hang a heavy weight on each end of the wire, the wire slowly cuts its way through the ice. After a time the wire falls out at the bottom, leaving the block of ice intact. The reason is that as the wire presses on the ice, the ice below the wire melts and allows the wire to pass through; but instantly, as soon as the pressure is released, the water freezes again above the wire. Laboratory methods appear to have no effect in compressing the actual atoms; all that can be accomplished is to reduce the spaces between them. 
What is, however, impossible to our feeble efforts, is accomplished on a large scale by the very high temperatures of some stars. We are used to the idea that an increase in heat usually forces molecules and atoms further apart. A metal rod expands when it is heated. An allowance of 10 inches had to be left in the great Forth Bridge for the expansion and contraction between summer and winter temperatures. In the hot sun the atoms take up more space than in the cool earth, for they spread out; so the density of the Sun is only a quarter of that of the earth. Expansion by heating is the usual method until we reach a temperature so high that the defence of the atom is broken down. 
At a temperature measured in hundreds of millions of degrees the structure of the atom collapses. The electrons are forced in on the nucleus and lie side by side with it. There is a sudden and extraordinary increase of density. 
This phenomenon has been observed in a number of stars called 'white dwarfs'. These stars are of small size, extremely high temperature, and extraordinary density. Sir James Jeans has described a star of this class. It is very small, with a diameter only half of the earth. The Sun is more than a million times as big as the earth; and yet this comparatively tiny white dwarf star probably contains three times as much matter as the Sun. 
We usually compare densities with the density of water. When we say that the density of iron is 7.8 we mean that a cubic inch say, of iron weighs 7.8 as much as a cubic inch of water. The densest of all metals known on earth is Osmium; it is twenty-two and a half times as dense as water, and just about twice as heavy as the same volume of lead. 
The density of the White Dwarf is so extraordinary that there is nothing remotely like it in the experience of Science. We jump suddenly from a maximum density of twenty-two and a half on earth to an average density in this White Dwarf of 36,000,000. 
We will continue this theme next week. 
With kind greetings, 
Your Hidden Master. 
