SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 15. 

Dear Disciple, 
In our last Lecture we have learnt that there is an enormous amount of empty space within the atom. If that were all we could say about it there would be no such thing as Matter to our perceptions. A bar of iron would collapse into an invisible fragment, and the 6,000 trillion tons of the earth's mass would crumple up into a sphere a mere half-mile in diameter. 
But in order to complete the picture of our material world we have to add movement. As we have already told you that the particles ejected from atoms have a speed of 10,000 miles a second. The electrons also revolve around the nucleus of an atom at great speed. When we compare an electron with the earth we find that the latter circles round the Sun in about a year at the rate of 1,000 miles a minute. In contrast to this an electron does not take a year to revolve around its nucleus but does it a great many times per second, for its movement is (or seems) extremely quick and the orbit small. The electron revolves not only in a circular or elliptical orbit around the nucleus, but the orbit itself also rolls round. There is the same sort of roll in the orbits of the planets, but it is very small in their case, says Science. The orbit of an electron rolls very rapidly, so that, the electron actually moves through every point of the 'shell' on which its orbit lies, many times per second. 
This question of the relative speeds of planets and electrons will lead us to some extraordinary conclusions, as you will see later. 
Einstein explained the movement of precession (the rolling of the orbit) in a very interesting way. He said that the mass of any object increases with its speed. Such an idea did not fit into the old conception of mechanics in which mass could be changed in form but not in amount. But it does fit into modern atomic mechanics, in which mass and energy are two forms of the same thing. Any body moving around another body in an elliptical orbit moves quickest when it is nearest the body round which it revolves. The planet Mercury varies considerably in its distance from the Sun, and consequently in the speed at which it revolves round the Sun. When nearest the Sun its speed is greatest, and therefore its mass is greatest, according to this new theory. There is a greater attraction between the Sun and this greater mass, and the planet is drawn in so that its orbit is pulled round. Precession is the greatest in the case of Mercury, which has the most elliptical orbit, but it is observable in the orbits of other planets; but it is far greater in the case of fast moving electrons. Thus speaks 'modern' Science, but your Masters do not accept this theory at all, which is only a theory and not an established scientific Law. Nor is it one of the great Laws of Occult Science as you will learn in due course. Science adds that although the electrons do not fill the atom, an electron moves so quickly that it is almost continuously at every point of the boundary of the atom; forming an almost impassable boundary. It is only the minute high-speed particles that can break through this boundary. The question of speed — which is an illusion — as well as the true Laws of Time and Space — will be discussed and revealed to you in our Higher Studies. 
Occult Science states most definitely that the whole of the above mentioned declaration of ordinary Science, which it hails as 'one of the outstanding discoveries of modern physics', is a farrago of utter nonsense, and that Science is completely at sea in this respect, as well as in many others. In a few years time Science will discover some new theory about this *(see note at end). 
We have told you already some of the Laws in connection with the atom and the movements of its electrons, which are kept in their places by the Laws of attraction and repulsion — producing balance. All existing earthly matter is kept together — and apart — by means of balance, with the aid of the magnetic fields which surround all material bodies, from the great Sun of our Solar System to the nucleus of the tiny atom. When Science says that 'the solidity of an iron bar is the resistance of whirling electrons to penetration' it does not know what it is talking about. 
Mass is a term used in physics with greater frequency and assurance (such as 'mass of a body'), than any other term, and few are more difficult to define. Mass is often confused with weight, a mistake not helped by the use of the same names for the units of mass and of weight (e.g. gram). What appears to be the only inseparable attribute of mass is inertia; and indeed, for the purpose of dynamics, inertia may be taken as the measure of mass. One body has twice as much mass as another body if it offers twice as much force in opposition to the same acceleration, no matter where the two bodies may be in the Universe. 
Inertia is one of the few properties manifested by all kinds of matter. While its name infers inaction (no doubt from the fact that bodies do not set themselves in motion), inertia is an actual opposition to any acceleration of motion. That is, the acceleration of a body in any sense, either as to speed or direction of motion, requires the application of force proportional to the mass of the body and to the amount of acceleration. The reaction to this force, acting always through the centre of the mass, is a measure of the inertia of the body. 
It is interesting to speculate as to wherein the inertia of a body resides. Is it inherent in the body itself or does it in some way concern also its physical environment? The discovery of electromagnetic mass and of electromagnetic inertia, and the identification of the latter as a property of the electromagnetic field surrounding a moving charge, suggests that the ordinary inertia of neutral masses may be similarly traceable to some reaction in the neighbouring space. (Do you note how Science here is becoming apprehensive of our Laws of Balance?). 
And when we consider that all matter is, in the last analysis, probably composed of electricity (it is not — although electricity is the life-blood of the Universe), the idea that inertia may actually be an electromagnetic reaction appears not unreasonable. In the last few sentences we have again a remarkable approach by Science to the Ancient Teachings of Occult Science, in which it has always regarded electricity as the life-blood of the material Universe. Occult Science teaches as follows in regard to matter. 
The visible effects of matter are nothing but the effects of a force, and if we wish to attain to a clear conception of matter, we must first form one of force. 
The philosophy of the school of Hartmann, which was partly accepted by several of the greatest scientists, taught that the problem of matter can only be solved by assuming an invisible force, acquaintance with which was termed ‘magical knowledge' by Schopenhauer, and also ‘Magical effect or action of WILL'. 
We know that every exertion of will results in force and that, according to the above named German School of Philosophy, the manifestations of atomic forces are individual actions of will, resulting in the unconscious rushing together of atoms into the concrete image already subjectively created by the Will. 
Democritus taught, after his instructor Leucippus, that the first Principles of all things contained in the Universe were atoms and a vacuum. In its Kabalistic sense, the vacuum means in this instance the latent Hidden Logos, or God, or latent Force, which at its first mani festation became WILL, and thus communicated the first impulse to these atoms - whose agglomeration is Matter. This vacuum was but another name for Chaos, and an unsatisfactory one, for according to Peripatetics 'nature abhors a vacuum'. 
That before Democritus the Ancients were familiar with the idea of the indestructibility of matter is proved by their allegories and numerous other facts. Movers gives a definition of the Phoenician idea of the ideal sun-light as ‘a spiritual influence issuing from the highest God, IAO, the Light conceivable only by intellect — the physical and spiritual Principle of all things; out of which the Soul emanates.' 
It was the male Essence, or Wisdom, while the primitive matter or Chaos was the female Principle. Thus the first two principles, co eternal and infinite, were already with the 'primitive' Phoenicians, spirit and matter. Therefore the theory is as old as the world, for the Phoenicians received their knowledge from the great Adepts of Atlantis, and Democritus was not the first philosopher who taught it; whilst intuition existed in man before the ultimate development of his reason — for that is but material thinking whilst intuition is the Divine whisper of the Soul to the Higher Mind in Man. But it is in the denial of the boundless and endless Entity, the possessor of that invisible WILL, which we for lack of a better term call God, that lies the powerlessness of every materialistic science to explain the occult phenomena of SPIRIT. It is in the rejection a priori of everything which might force science to cross the boundaries of 'exact'(?) science and step into the domain of psychological or, if we prefer, metaphysical physiology, that we find the secret cause of their discomfiture (by the manifestations of spiritual Will), and their absurd theories to account for these spiritual causes of material phenomena. 
The ancient philosophers affirmed that it is in consequence of the manifestation of that WILL, termed by Plato the Divine Idea, that everything visible and invisible sprung into existence. As that Intelligent Idea which, by directing its sole will-power toward a centre of localised forces, called objective forms into being, so can Man, the microcosm of the Great Macrocosm, do the same in proportion with the development of his willpower. 
The imaginary atoms — which were originally a mere figure of speech employed by Democritus, and gratefully seized upon by the materialists — are like automatic workmen, moved inwardly by the influx of that Universal Will directed upon them and which, manifesting itself as Force, sets them into activity. 
The plan of the structure to be erected is in the mind of the Architect and reflects his Will; abstract as yet, from the instant of conception it becomes concrete through these atoms which follow faithfully every line, point and figure traced in the Imagination of the Divine Geometer. 
In the foregoing sentences you will be able to see some of the reasons why we have discussed the atom and a few of its known and unknown mechanisms for the last three months. You will trace in them a preliminary explanation of how the atoms are formed and why the electrons are moving around the nucleus. You will see the purpose of one of our remarks when we stated that the atom is the most important part of the material, and that it is very closely connected with the spiritual. 
We advise you again to study once more our previous Lectures and compare their contents with the latter part of this one. The subject is of tremendous importance, and you cannot ponder too deeply over what we have told you so far. Study also the Manifesto and take great care that you do not lose any of the papers we have sent you, for you will need them later on. 
May the Light of Inspiration pervade all your Being. 
Your Hidden Master. 
*NOTE. As we predicted, Science has now discovered a new theory about the atom which it calls the 'electron cloud model'. In this theory electrons are no longer depicted as particles moving around the nucleus in a fixed orbit. Instead, Science says we can't know exactly where they are, what direction they are heading in, or how fast they are travelling; so we just ignore the problem and describe their probable location around the nucleus as an arbitrary 'cloud'. Needless to add, this silly theory will also be abandoned in the future! 
