SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 17. 

Dear Disciple, 
As promised in our last Lecture we continue our discussion of the possible collapse of the atom. 
A cubic foot of water weighs about 6242 pounds (28 kgs). A cubic foot of the white dwarf star we mentioned in our previous Lecture weighs 36,000,000 times as much, or about 1,000,000 tons. A piece the size of an old penny would weigh about a ton. Such a density is surprising when we consider that nearly the whole of an ordinary, uncompressed atom is empty space, even when it seems to be closely packed when there are 92 electrons in it as in Uranium. What the highest temperatures and pressures at our disposal are not within sight of achieving is accomplished by the enormously greater temperatures of the white dwarfs — the empty spaces are filled up by compressing electrons and nuclei in them. 
When a liquid boils there is a sudden increase in volume. With water as the boiling liquid there is a sudden jump from 1 to 1,700 — so that a cubic inch of water becomes nearly a cubic foot of steam. That is an example of one of the essential differences between a liquid and a gas. In a liquid the molecules are closely packed, and slide over one another; in a gas they are much more spread out, indeed they are spread out so as to fill all available space. The expansion of a cubic inch of water into a cubic foot of steam allows a molecule 1,700 times as much space in which to move to and fro. If we confine water in a closed vessel and go on heating it, we can raise it above the normal boiling point, and still it does not boil. This is because there is no room for the molecules to spread out; the water then boils explosively. The molecules excited by heating, rush violently about in the available space and strike any obstacle that comes in their way. When a boiler explodes it is because the materials of which it is composed break down under the hammering of quadrillions of water molecules. 
We say that the boiling point of water is 100°C or 212°F, but that is only true in certain conditions. We have just seen that it is not true for water confined in a closed vessel. If there were no pressure at all on water there would be nothing to prevent molecules from jumping out of the liquid into the space above it, and so become a gas. Usually there is the air pressing down on the water surface; this restrains the molecules from jumping out, but it does not altogether prevent them from doing so; we know that water will dry up at any temperature. The hotter the water is the more excitedly the molecules move, and the more readily they jump out of the liquid. At the boiling point there is a balance between the downward pressure of the air and the upward pressure of the water molecules leaving the liquid to become gas, so that the air pressure no longer acts as a brake. If we reduce the air pressure a little we release the brake slightly; molecules of water escape more readily, and so the boiling point is lowered. Actually the boiling point of water varies slightly from day to day; it is slightly higher with a high barometer, and lower with a low barometer. 
You probably know the story of the two mountaineers who tried to boil eggs at the top of a high mountain. In spite of boiling the eggs for half an hour the eggs refused to set. Then one of the mountaineers had a brain wave; he placed a large stone on the lid of the saucepan, and in 342 minutes the eggs were cooked. 
At the top of a high mountain the air pressure is low, so that water boils at a temperature some degrees below the usual boiling point. The stone supplied extra pressure by keeping the lid down and so raised the boiling point and the eggs were done. In some industrial processes it is desirable to have water boiling below the usual boiling point; in making sugar for example, we want to boil off the water without raising the temperature so high as to injure the sugar. For this purpose vacuum pans are used. The pans are enclosed except for a pipe through which the air and water vapour are sucked out. The pressure on the liquid is thus kept low and it boils at a lower temperature than in an open pan. 
From the foregoing discussion one thing stands out: heat is movement and energy. We want you to keep this principle well in your mind, for it will develop later into something very interesting. 
Science has known only since the work of Rumford and Davy, in the first decade of the 19th century, that heat is a form of kinetic energy. They succeeded in boiling water and melting ice by heat generated mechanically. Prior to their work, heat had been believed to be a substance, a sort of gas called 'caloric'. This was no doubt suggested by the shimmering appearance of the air surrounding a hot object. Now if you look along the 'live' rail of an electrified railway track you will see the same shimmer above and along it, caused by the electric current running along the live rail. Yet, the live rail itself is not hot. We therefore obtain the same shimmering effect from hot materials and the cold steel of a 'live' rail. Please remember this also. No one appears to have tested the question as to whether a heated body weighs more or less than a cold one, or to have attempted the isolation and analysis of the supposed 'caloric' as it escaped from the body on cooling *(see note at end). One Scientist says innocently in reference to this that “This well illustrates the very imperfect state of scientific thought a century ago". But let us assure the learned gentleman that the “state of scientific thought” is just as 'imperfect today, and always will be so, for so long as Science is bound by the fetters of materialism. 
The chaotic (?) agitation of molecules which Science knows at last to constitute heat, and the violence of which determines the temperature, is strikingly exhibited, though on a much altered scale, by the Brownian movement. When a substance is heated, its molecules receive impulses which result in the acceleration of their motions of translation, of rotation, and sometimes of internal vibration. With a gas composed of diatomic molecules, a simple calculation based upon the known specific heat and upon kinetic theory shows that 60% of the energy, at ordinary temperatures goes into the translational molecular motion, and the other 40% into rotational motion; the internal vibrations apparently do not begin until higher temperatures are reached. This apportionment is in accord with the principle of equipartition of energy and the quantum theory. 
When Science states that molecules are in a 'chaotic' state of agitation when the temperature of a substance is raised, they are again on the wrong path. All movements in nature are subject to definite and unalterable Laws, and in time Science will discover that these movements vary definitely and always in the same manner according to the substances whose ordinary temperatures have been temporarily raised. The rhythm of the agitated molecules and their direction is always the same in the same substance. When several substances are mixed and then heated above their normal temperature the agitation of the molecules becomes more complicated, but always subject, even then, to fixed laws of movement etc. 
Water will have a different rhythm from oil when heated, and tar molecules move in a different way to those of wine, to quote a few instances at random. But this is not such an important point. What is interesting is that Science has discovered the three movements of molecular, rotational and vibrational motion of molecules in heated substances. These three kinds of movements are also observed in the sacred centres of the human body, and to a smaller extent, in the bodies of animals. There they mean that the more complicated and perfect these sacred centres move, rotate and vibrate, the higher evolved is the man within whose body they are situated. But, as these centres can only be seen clairvoyantly, Science, being too grossly material, knows nothing about them. 
Again we urge you to remember well what we have told you in this Lecture. You would do well to think these things over for a while and let us know in due course to what conclusions you have come. We want you to think for yourselves from now on, and if you can anticipate us in any way, we shall be glad. Do not lean too heavily on your Hidden Masters. Try to stand on your own feet as much as you can, for in that way your development will be more rapid. Do not be afraid to make mistakes, for from them we learn most, and if at any time you come to wrong conclusions we can easily put you right. 
Science has said that heat may be shown to develop electricity, electricity to produce heat, and magnetism to evolve electricity, and vice versa. This is but the A.B.C. of Occultism and of the earliest Alchemists. The indestructibility of matter and force being discovered and proved, the great problem of Eternity is solved — according to Science!! What need have they any more for Spirit? Its uselessness is henceforth 'Scientifically demonstrated!!! 
But nearly all the Ancient religions were based on the indestructi bility of matter and force — plus the emanation of the whole from an ethereal, spiritual fire – or Central Sun, which is God or Spirit, on the knowledge of whose potentiality is based ancient theurgic magic. 
We will end our present Lecture on this note, for it completes another step forward on the path for you. If you have anything to tell us please do so according to the rules of the Manifesto. But we now require also a report on your experiments in seeing, hearing, and Peace. 
You will please tell us frankly where you now stand with these exercises, so that we can form a definite opinion on the state of your progress. May your Sacred Centres blaze in splendour. 
Your Hidden Master. 
*NOTE. Since this Lecture was last updated, Science appears to have discovered that a heated body weighs more than a cold one. We say appears', for, as we have learned in these Lectures, Science is apt to change its theories with the rapidity of the Seasons! In any event, one Scientist asks: "Can it really be true that a hot brick weighs more than a cold brick?" The answer, according to that same scientist, is: "a hot object has more kinetic energy so it weighs more and has a higher mass than a cold object." 
