SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 19. 

Dear Disciple, 
We may compare some of the stars with a vacuum inasmuch that their atoms are so widely spread that they are in a state which we should regard as a fairly good vacuum. These stars make up for their tenuity by their vast size; they are consequently known as giant stars and are the opposite in every way of the white dwarf stars we discussed before. 
Betelgeuse is one of these giants; it is the bright star in the top left hand corner of Orion. Betelgeuse has a density that is only the thousandth part of the Sun. Its size has been measured and its diameter is estimated to be more than 600,000,000 miles. If we compare it with our Solar System by imagining its centre at the Sun, it would stretch out all round to half-way between Mars and Jupiter; engulfing Mercury, Venus, the Earth and Mars within its body, including the Sun itself and the orbits of the planets just mentioned. Its volume is 20,000,000 times as great as that of the Sun, but it contains only about 15 times as much matter. That is to say, if the tenuous gas of Betelgeuse were condensed to the density of the Sun, we should have a star 15 times as big as the Sun. 
The Universe (not our Solar System or Kosmos, which forms only part of the Universe) as a whole is as empty of matter as is an atom. It has been calculated that in our comparatively densely populated part of the Universe there is one star in every 10 cubic parsecs; and a parsec is about 19 billion miles. Outside the ‘Milky Way' (which is a small part of a huge outer circle of stars, which encircles the whole of that Universe of which our Solar System is but a tiny atom) there are vast empty spaces, with an average density of a still lower grade. But even in these 'empty' spaces it is possible to detect, by their effects on the spectrum, faint traces of matter in the form of a few isolated and wandering atoms that are present in the most 'empty' space. 
If you have read the foregoing carefully — as you should — you will have noted that we have referred to our Universe, "of which our Solar System, or Kosmos forms but a small atom.” Our Universe is a huge body composed of Solar Systems, enclosed, so to say, within the boundaries of the Milky Way. It is, in fact, an 'Atom' of super dimensions, and its form too is ovoid, or egg-shaped, and it is again surrounded by a colossal magnetic field, the same as electrons, atoms, living beings (which includes even stones, sand and crystals, etc.), Planets and Solar Systems. There are many millions of other huge Universes in various stages of development visible with the aid of the great telescopes, and they are outside the Milky Way, and they are all constituted and constructed in a way similar to our Universe; and they are kept at their proper distances by their magnetic fields, which obey the Laws of attraction and repulsion — producing balance. 
All these Universes form again in combinations making still larger ovoid structures, and our Universe thus is nothing more than another super atom in such a gigantic egg; and so on ad infinitum. It makes the brain reel does it not? It staggers our finite imaginations - if we think only in material terms. Science today has an inkling of these great magnitudes, but it does not know yet. 
But the actual conditions within these incalculable numbers of Universes and Super Universes cannot be known to mankind any more than they can be known to the Creators of our own Solar System, or of other Solar Systems within our Universe. Beyond our Universe lies the Great Deep which separates us from the others; and that Great Deep is an awful mystery; absolutely beyond all human or Supra-human understanding. We only mention it in passing along our Road to Enlightenment in order to show you one of the reasons for our discussions on the structure of the atom, for it will help you to form a mind-picture of the structure of our Universe, and beyond. Please think deeply on this great subject, and refer to our previous technical discussions in reference to the atom, etc. It may also prepare you for a new conception of the Nature of God. But this will come later, and in full detail. 
Atoms do not usually occur singly on the earth; they are combined to form molecules. Even the atoms of the elementary gases usually combine in pairs. Oxygen, nitrogen, hydrogen and chlorine are all composed of molecules, each made up of two atoms of the gas. Molecules are usual, separate atoms are exceptional. Science describes four distinct ways in which atoms can be linked or bonded together to form molecules; but whatever the type of link, it always depends upon the mingling of the magnetic fields of the outer electrons of the atoms. 
The electrons of an atom are not arranged haphazardly any more than the planets in our Solar System are in their orbits by chance. There are definite Laws which regulate both planets and atoms in regard to their elliptical paths. Some electrons have satellites, the same as some planets; Science has not yet discovered them and they are one of the effects which cause the phenomena of isotopes. 
Until recently Science said that electrons are on definite 'shells' surrounding the nucleus of the atom. These 'shells' are nothing more nor less than the stream of energy left in the wake of an electron as it sails rapidly along its orbit. Each electron forms such a “shell' although Science believes that the 'innermost shell'in any atom can contain only two orbits. Thus Science conceived two orbits as two 'shells'. 
Hydrogen has only one electron, the inert gas helium has two; "so that the shell is complete in helium” says Science. This is wrong; there are two 'shells', which are only orbits, in helium. 
It is not necessary for our purpose to develop this further; you now know that each orbit of each electron forms a 'shell', which is nothing else than the energy of the electron left behind it along its orbit. In the same manner our planets leave behind them along their paths a stream of energy, which is not visible to us on account of the relatively slow speed of the planets. Bodies with a much higher speed, such as comets, leave a visible stream of energy behind, as you may ob serve for yourself with a telescope of even small power. 
The elaborate system (which was only a theory) which Science built up in regard to these 'shells' (which Science now calls 'orbitals') has now been scrapped in favour of the equally wrong theory of 'Electron Clouds' or 'Atomic orbitals'. In this new theory, electrons are no longer depicted as particles moving around the nucleus in a fixed orbit. Instead, quantum mechanics state we shouldn't know exactly where they are, and hence Science describes their 'probable’ location around the nucleus as an arbitrary 'cloud'!! We need hardly add that this theory, too, will be scrapped in due time, as you will hear one of these days, when Science knows more about electrons. 
One kind of link between atoms is called the 'covalent bond'. Chlorine has 7 electrons on its 'outermost shell’. When 2 chlorine atoms meet, each contributes an electron towards a link. These outer electrons (in reality their magnetic fields) become a part of both atoms, so that each atom has 8 electrons on its 'outermost shell' or orbit, and therefore, it has the structure of an inert gas. 
A gas is said to be 'inert when the inner shells or orbits are completely filled and there are 8 orbits in the outermost shell (except of course, in the case of helium, which has only two shells or orbits). The outermost shell of 8 orbits is sometimes called the 'outer octet'. 
When there are 8 electrons in the outermost shell or orbit, the atom appears to be sated (saturated). Such atoms are chemically inert; they do not form molecules by joining with other atoms: they exist as self-satisfied entities. This is the reason why the great ‘atom we call our Solar System soars free in the Universal Space, without having another "atom', or Solar System, joined to it. The structure of the inert gas atoms is referred to as the 'inert gas structure'. 
The electrons forming the link appear to have orbits round the nuclei of both atoms, possibly in a 'figure-of-eight' form. The rapid intertwined movement of the electrons make this a very strong link between such atoms. 
Again we draw your attention to the Hermetic Axiom — "As above, so below; as below, so above.”. 
When we gave you the exercise on the changing of the colour of the halo around any body which is alight, such as a candle, we gave you an important clue, which you may have missed. It is this: when you project from your Higher Mind a material vibration in the form of a colour (all colours are caused by vibrations), you give proof that your Higher Mind is a material substance, or else you could not project a material vibration from it. During sleep, the Higher Mind, within its own vehicle called the Astral Body, wanders around within the denser or finer regions contained within the material Realms of the Earth, or slightly below or above it. It can do so in a subconscious state, or in full possession of all its mental faculties. It can go further, and penetrate into Realms which are of much more ethereal natures; it can also descend into the much more dense Realms of the slower and lower states of consciousness; these realms are called the Astral Worlds. At death the Higher Mind (still material, for it is of a negative nature) leaves the dense material world we all know during ordinary 'life', and it proceeds to either a less material Realm or to one that is still denser. It all depends on what sort of a person we are, and to what we have attuned during our earthly life in our thoughts and acts. But remember please, that the Higher Mind (not the Soul, which is a positive and Divine Principle) is material, although less so than the lower mind or human body. 
Being still material (though on a much higher rate of vibration) it can manifest best in material surroundings of an equally high rate of vibration, and to the developed mystic (and often to others) these surroundings, realms, regions or worlds are very real indeed. They are closely connected with the Earth, and it is possible to see their inhabitants if one is clairvoyant, and the inhabitants of the Higher Realms can contact us in some way or another, if they have been properly trained while still on Earth, or have attained a high intellectual or artistic status, and are fine thinkers, artists, poets and so on, or have been trained in the Occult Sciences in previous incarnations, even if during the last incarnation they have had little to do with the actual work of Occult Study. 
In the manuscript commentary of Proclus on Magic he gives the following account: “in the same manner as lovers gradually advance from that beauty which is apparent in sensible forms, to that which is divine; so the Ancient Priests, when they considered that there is a certain alliance and sympathy in natural things to each other, and of things manifest to Occult Powers, and discovered that all things subsist in all, they fabricated a Sacred Science from this mutual sympathy and similarity. 
"Thus they recognised things supreme in such as are subordinate, and the subordinate in the Supreme; in the Celestial Regions, Terrene properties subsisting in a causal and Celestial manner; and in Earth Celestial properties, but according to terrene conditions." 
The above paragraph will be a fine exercise in which to use your analytical powers of reasoning and your powers of imagination. 
Please study it carefully and compare it with what we have told you so far. It is true that you are only touching the outer fringes of our Teachings as yet, but you cannot commence too soon your meditations on such high and subtle teachings as those contained in the words of Proclus. 
Again there is more in them than meets the eye at first or even a tenth reading. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
