SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 18. 

Dear Disciple, 
We will now extend the colour exercise, you have been practising for several weeks, a little. 
Light a candle in a dark room, and place it in front of the centre of a mirror on a level with your eyes. Seat yourself about four feet away from the candle, relax entirely and look steadily at the flame. When we say 'look at the flame' we mean that you should not strain your eyes in any way. The best thing is to have them half-closed and completely relaxed also. You know that the eyes are only lenses which send to the centre of vision within your brain a picture of that which is before you, according to the way your mind interprets that picture. We will not go into the technicalities of sight yet, for that is not necessary at this stage of our studies. 
Instead of straining your eyes when you look at the candle flame you should try to look at the candle from the back of your head, as it were, if we may put it thus crudely. If you watch carefully what happens inside your head when you look at anything you will (if you are really relaxed), be able to feel or sense the actual spot within the brain where the seat of vision is placed. Try this before you look at the candle flame. If you cannot locate the spot at once try for several days, as many days as possible, to find that spot. When you have located it (which really should not be difficult) practise looking with that spot, and not with the eyes. This may seem a very daft way of looking at anything, but we assure you that it is necessary to learn the technique, and we hope we have made ourselves understood. 
When you have mastered the technique of 'looking from the back of the head' (though in a forward direction of course, and not looking out of the back of your head backwards!), then look at the candle flame, around which you will see a halo. Practise this exercise with any light you see anywhere, without making yourself conspicuous. Try it with street lamps, electric lights, the moon; with anything that is alight, and try to see the halo around all such illuminations. When you have done this for some time, and you can see it under all conditions, you will note that these halos contain all the colours of the rainbow, or most of those of the spectrum. When you can see all these colours in their proper order (as in the rainbow), then, and not before, you may try to project from your mind any colour you wish towards such a halo, so that it will take on, if you are successful, that colour which you have first fixed upon in your mind, and which by an act of your will can be sent towards these halos. If there are two of you who can practise this together you should sit about six feet away from the candle in such a way that you form a triangle, with the candle at its apex. If one of you projects blue to the flame and the other red, you will see that the outsides of the flame take on these two colours — one on each side — whereas the centre of the flame (which is facing you both, more or less) becomes purple. This is proof that the changing colour of the candle's halo, or aura, is not due to your imagination, but that it is a fact. You can try any two colours in this way, and the third will always be seen in the centre of the flame as a combination of the two. 
We have no doubt that you will be able to vary this exercise in many ways, for the possible variations are almost endless, and we want you — if you will co-operate with us — to try this if you can. Groups of three, seven, or twelve can produce some very spectacular effects in this way, and have done so in the past on many occasions. This will be, to you, a new and expert method of demonstrating to yourself a Principle which generally fails in other Orders when they do not know the real technique of this experiment. You should carry on with this exercise for the next four weeks, and then report to us on your progress. 
The exercise on hearing is more subtle, and you must carry on with this for another four weeks as well, trying to hear higher and higher overtones as they fade away into the upper regions of sound. This is very difficult and you will have to practise it for a long time before you begin to see and hear any extraordinary results; it is a unique form of attunement, as you may have realised already. But remember please, that it is extremely important, for it forms a ladder to Heaven, as it were, in the end. There is one slight extension we will give you now in regard to the 'hearing exercise. 
When you have struck your note (holding down the loud pedal with your foot and the note struck with your finger), close your eyes and endeavour to see the colours of the overtones. They will become visible to you as a rapidly changing series of tiny fiery specks in different colours; each speck representing the colour of an overtone. When you have developed this, in a few weeks time, you will be delighted with the magnificent display of fairy fireworks you will behold. This is the first allusion to a Law which will be explained later. On each different note there is a different series of overtones, and an entirely different and distinct series or range of colours, made visible to you in the form of these tiny specks. It is very fascinating once you can do it, and it helps to develop certain of your inner centres. Whatever you see or hear: keep calm and full of Peace; this is essential. Please do not treat any of these exercises lightly, for they are of the utmost 
importance; they are not given to keep you busy, or to prevent you from asking too many awkward questions. They are for the purpose of preparing you for the development of the Greater Powers within yourself, which at present are lying dormant. 

Now we must return to our studies of the Atom. According to Science, atoms link together to form molecules by more than one means. The various theories concerning the manner in which atoms are joined to form simple and complex molecules are fairly involved, but there is no need for us to plunge deeply into these intricacies. 
We all know how magnets attract each other; the North Pole of one magnet attracts the South Pole of another. This is also true of atoms and simple molecules when the link between them is at an angle; for if it is a little on one side we get a preponderance of negative charge on that side. We have, in fact, a tiny magnet with a negative and positive pole. This happens because in many cases they are joined by the outer electrons of the atoms, when their magnetic fields are in sympathy with each other and mingle. But although there are diverse forms of bonding, generally speaking it is the angle of the magnetic links which plays a large part in determining the strength or weakness of these magnetic bonds. Science calls this the 'bond angle'. Such polar molecules attract each other just as strongly as magnets, and they adhere to each other more strongly than those with weaker powers of attraction. 
Water molecules provide an excellent example owing to the strength of their molecular bonds. The bond angle between the two bonds of the three atoms which make up this compound (2 of hydrogen and 1 of oxygen) is 105°, thus keeping one side of the molecule positive, and the other negative. In addition, the hydrogen 'bonds' also provide strong links between their positive nuclei and other negative electrons in nearby oxygen atoms. This is why water is one of the most stable compounds; the molecules adhere strongly to each other. It also explains why water has such a relatively high boiling point of 100°C; it requires great energy to break the powerful bonds which link its atoms and molecules together. Diethyl ether boils at only 35°C, and chloroform at 61.3°C; this is because their molecules are not so strongly attracted to one another. 
Some liquids will not mix. The most obvious example is oil and water; the water repels the oil compounds which are constructed in a very different manner. But alcohol mixes easily with water and provides a remarkable example of an almost perfect mixture: for if equal parts of water and alcohol are mixed together, the mixture occupies less volume than the total of the two original quantities emploved. This particular problem puzzled scientists for a long time. but they eventually discovered that the alcohol molecules occupied spaces between the particles of water, and vice versa. A ‘shrinkage in volume thus occurs; but it still remains a mixture and not a new compound, for no new links or bonds are forged between the different molecules of water and alcohol. 
The molecules in a liquid can slide about, and sometimes there is a very rapid interchange between one part of a liquid and another. In a solid the molecules are more fixed. They do vibrate about fixed mean positions, but they have not the same freedom of movement as in a liquid. 
In crystals the molecules are not merely fixed in place, but they are regularly arranged. Sir William Bragg was one of the earliest physicists to inquire into the structure of crystals. He used x-rays in his investigations; these are light-waves of very short wavelength, shorter even than the ultra-violet rays. By examining how x-rays are reflected and refracted by crystal surfaces Bragg was able to deduce the structure of the crystals. There are many possible arrangements of atoms and molecules in crystals. It is a general rule that the atoms in a crystal are distributed in such a way as to pack themselves into the least possible space, thus giving what is called a close-packed structure; they are the other extreme from gases, which spread out so as to fill all the available space, even when that space is already filled with another gas. This is the reason why Man cannot achieve a complete vacuum. When a vessel is being exhausted by pumping, the vessel remains full of gas at all stages of the pumping. There are fewer molecules of gas per cubic inch than before the pumping, but these molecules spread out and fill all the space. Each molecule takes as much space to move about in as the other molecules will allow it, and so we have the whole space filled. 
A vessel holding a cubic foot will contain 9/100ths of an ounce of hydrogen at atmospheric pressure - a little less than a tenth of an ounce. In this small mass of gas there are about three-quarters of a quadrillion molecules. 
To reduce the pressure to a millionth of an atmosphere requires a very good air pump. Such a pressure would support only 3/100,000ths of an inch of mercury, instead of the usual 30 inches. To get such a vacuum we have to pump out all but a millionth of the gas molecules. 
There still remain, however, three quarters of a trillion molecules (75" or 75 followed by 16 noughts). These molecules have a hundred times as much space in which to jerk to and fro than before the pumping. The average space between them is only about a millionth of an inch. To reduce the pressure to a thousand-millionth of an atmosphere we have to pump out all but a thousandth of the very tenuous gas left in the vessel. The traces of gas still left fill the vessel just as much as the dense gas filled it before the pumping began. There are still 750 billion molecules left, and the spaces between them are a 100,000th of an inch. Try to imagine these multitudes within that small space of one cubic foot; it will be a good exercise for you. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
