SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 11. 

Dear Disciple, 
As in the case of hydrogen, there are other elements containing isotopes, such as chlorine (symbol Cl) for instance, which has two isotopes with atomic weights of 35 and 37 (35Cl and 37C1). Ordinary chlorine is a mixture of these two isotopes (roughly 75% 35C1 and 25% 37Cl) and has an atomic weight of 35.453. So we can say that there are two types of chlorine atom; one with 17 protons and 18 neutrons which has an atomic weight of 35 (35C1), and the other with 17 protons and 20 neutrons which has an atomic weight of 37 (37Cl). Both isotopes have the same number of protons (17), or positive charges on the nucleus, and that is what makes them chlorine and not some other element. 
Professor P. W. Aston devised a means by which minute quantities of isotopes were separated from each other. The atoms of the elements are ionized by giving each an electric charge by submitting the element to a stream of electrons. The charged atoms are deflected, lighter atoms being deflected more than heavier ones. The streams of atoms (ions) are allowed to fall on a photographic plate, and each stream makes a line on it. This gives a separate line corresponding to each isotope. The atomic weights are given by the positions of the photographic records on the plate. Such a record is called a mass spectrum which is now made using an instrument called a mass spectrometer. By means of mass spectrometry (MS) Science has been able to discover the isotopes, even where it is not possible to separate them in quantities that can be measured by ordinary means. The mass spectrum has thus enabled Science to say that chlorine has two isotopes, and what their atomic weights are. 
Two atoms of hydrogen unite with one atom of oxygen to form a molecule of water. Science states that the three atoms are held together by their outer electrons. This is not correct. The atoms are held together by means of the laws of attraction and repulsion. If this were not so the three atoms would mix and their electrons would mingle indiscriminately. Instead of this the three atoms are drawn together by the law of attraction as we said, but they are prevented from mingling their electrons by the protective magnetic field surrounding each atom, which acts as a repulsive force, and so the three atoms form a balanced unit of water. 
A molecule of water is therefore the smallest fragment of water that is water. If it were divided it would not be water but two gases: oxygen and hydrogen. The molecules of water are in a state of constant agitation. Molecules at the surface may leave the water and form vapour in the air; other molecules may leave the air and return to the main mass (however small) of the liquid. The hotter the water is the more violently the molecules are agitated. When the water boils, the upward pressure of the molecules trying to leave the liquid is equal to the downward pressure of the air, and so molecules of boiling water leave the liquid in great quantities and become steam. Not only do the molecules interchange with one another, but the atoms also interchange, and an atom of hydrogen may leave one molecule during the boiling processes and join on to another molecule; this goes on constantly. This interchange of atoms is one form of explanation why isotopes are seldom found unmixed. 
There has been ample time in the many millions of ages of the earth's history for the complete mixing of all its ingredients. Molecules are most active in the gaseous state, less active in the liquid state, and least active in the solid state. Therefore the complete mixing of isotopes appears to have taken place at an early stage in the history of the Solar System, when all the elements were in a gaseous or liquid condition. This was during the periods of the great Fire-Mists, about which more later on. 
The experiments in splitting the nuclei of the atoms conducted in scientific laboratories are paralleled in Nature. The nuclei of the atoms of radium and other radioactive elements are spontaneously breaking up. This again is the equivalent of the breaking up of a complete Kosmos, and that such things as the breaking up of a Kosmos can happen is described in the tables of the time-periods of our Solar System. These tables were worked out by the great sages of Ancient Atlantis, and they give the exact times of the recurring periods of sleeping and waking (or days and nights as they are also termed) of our own Solar System. 
An atom and a Kosmos are subject to the same Divine Laws. As the Ancient Sages calculated the periods of the Kosmos so has modern Science calculated the life periods of the atom. Science has found that the change from radium to emanation goes on at a definite rate which depends upon the amount of radium. It has been found that half of any quantity of radium changes to emanation in 1,620 years. Emanation is an inert gas. When a helium nucleus (or alpha particle) is ejected by a radium atom the nucleus loses two protons and the radium goes down two places in the atomic scale. It becomes 'emanation', which is itself radioactive, for it ejects helium nuclei, goes down two places and becomes a short lived substance called Radium-A. After further changes the final result is lead, which is not radioactive. 
At the end of the 1,620 year period there would only be half of the radium left. This goes on for further, and endless periods of 1,620 years. We can go on halving and never reach Zero, says Science. The time in which any quantity of radium loses half its mass is called the half-life period. The reason for giving the half-life period is that we can never reach Zero by halving. So it is with any radioactive element; and according to Science, some of these half-lives vary from periods of less than one millionth of a second, to more than a million years. Uranium has a half-life period of 4,500,000,000 years! Does this give you some idea of eternity? 
The number of particles expelled from radium is extremely large, although there is no appreciable diminution of the mass of radium from year to year. A gram of radium (about the 30th part of an ounce) expels 34,000,000,000 alpha particles per second. In a year that is about a trillion particles. The process goes on spontaneously. There seems to be no means of stopping it and no means of speeding it up. No more can our Solar System be stopped or accelerated. Nothing can happen to it until its appointed span of activity is over; provided that there are no bombardments!! 
Radium occurs almost everywhere, but in extremely minute quantities. In most rocks there are one or two parts in a billion, or about an ounce of radium in 20,000,000 tons of rock. Radium is a white metal; it is rapidly oxidised in air, it decomposes in water and in the metallic state it is a curiosity. It occurs principally in pitchblende, and in carnotite along with uranium. It was first obtained from the uranium residues of pitchblende of Joachimsthal (modern Jáchymov), in the Czech Republic; later from carnotite of Southwestern Colorado and Eastern Utah. Rich ores have since been found in Central Africa, Australia, Northwest Canada, etc. It is formed by the radioactive transformation of uranium — about 3,000,000 parts of uranium being accompanied in nature by one part of radium — and it spontaneously generates radon gas — about 100 cubic millimetres of radon per day per grain of radium. 
The amount of energy stored within atoms is enormous, just the same as the amount of energy contained within a Solar System is incalculable. The output of energy from radium is only a small fraction of the total energy. The final products of disintegration of radium are lead and helium; the atomic weight is reduced from 226 to 207. There is still a long way to go before an atomic weight of Zero can be reached by a complete disintegration. 
Atomic energy has now been harnessed and its potential can be calculated. The destruction of an ounce of matter, or rather its conversion into energy, would supply more than 1,000 million horsepower hours — the equivalent of about a million horses working at their best and without rest for well over a hundred years (1hp is equal to a unit of work performed at the rate of 550 foot-pounds per second). All other sources of energy (says Science) that we are aware of are insignificant when compared with the enormous reservoir of energy in apparently inert and lifeless matter. 
In this statement you will find again a confirmation of what we told you about the central position we occupy on the earth plane. Our ordinary sight cannot even penetrate into matter, in which we are supposed to be dwelling and should know all about. The same applies to our inability to behold the mysteries of the spirit by means of ordinary sight. We are dwelling in a realm of illusion. All the material things we think we see are not what they seem, but something quite different. All the spiritual conditions we believe we understand by means of religious instruction (no matter what the religion is) are quite different from what we are taught. Both matter and spirit are veiled from the average human sight. We see and hear what our intellect and animal instincts please to reveal unto us. But of TRUTH we have none in this way!! Each living Being sees and hears only that which he is capable of seeing and hearing according to the place he has reached in his evolution. Does an insect, a mouse, a bird, a horse, a lion, an ape or a human being see each the world in the same way? 
No!! Each lives in his world of illusion, which is different from the worlds of illusion of all other beings. Do even two human beings see the world in exactly the same manner? Again No. We have only to listen to the evidence of eyewitnesses in a court of law to know that no two persons ever see an incident in the same way. Can a person who knows nothing about Art see the same things in a picture as a trained artist? No, he cannot, for he is not of the same grade of evolution as far as Art is concerned. Moreover, he has never been taught to see and understand! Who, then, knows the Truth and sees and hears all conditions and things as they really are, both material and spiritual? 
This we will try to understand in our next Lecture. 
May you soon behold Truth. 
Your Hidden Master. 
