SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 13. 

Dear Disciple, 
This lecture completes the third step in this Grade. In other words you have been once round the Sacred Triangle, the symbol of the Highest Spiritual Regions, whilst the Square is the symbol of the Four Material Realms. Four Triangles like this series of lectures make a square of Triangles (a Pyramid), symbolising the complete glyph of all the Seven Regions of which the Earth plane is the first and the lowest if you wish to count them in this manner. 
We now ask you to be good enough to write to us and present us with a report of your progress in this grade as far as the exercises on Peace, Power and Secrecy are concerned, as well as about your success or otherwise with the exercises on Colour and Sound. The Colour exercises are given to you to commence or increase your sense of Inner Sight, and the Sound Exercises to sharpen your sense of hearing in regard to the harmonic overtones of the sounds produced by a piano, guitar, or by any other means. 
You will know by this time whether our lectures are all that we have promised in the Manifesto, or if they are not, so that you may wish to relegate our Teachings to the dust heap of vain promises of which consist the pretensions of so many so-called ‘mystic' or 'occult' orders, groups and mystery schools who inundate the world and the Internet with their blatant and pernicious advertisements claiming to represent the 'Ascended Masters', 'Illuminati' 'World Teacher and similar non-existent figments of the imaginations of the unthinking when such names are used by those who seek to capitalise on the gullibility of the inexperienced seeker, which repulse anyone with a sense of fine feeling and elevated thinking. 
You will also know if our Teachings suit your desires in regard to the study of real mystical and occult Teachings via the marvels of the material. If they do not we shall be pleased if you will tell us so, for it is entirely useless to continue any studies if you feel that you are not obtaining that for which you are seeking. You have, of course, but hardly commenced, for three months is only one-twelfth of the Lectures of the Outer Circle alone in our Organisation. But if you have been able to read between the lines of our Lectures, or even if you have read only the actual words describing the Principles and Laws we have but lightly touched upon so far, and if you have any experience of Occult Studies in other Orders, then you must have realised in these short three months that our Teachings commence where the rest leave off. 
Again we must impress upon your mind that we never boast but state facts only. We have personal knowledge of all the Teachings in the various occult groups and orders, and we know all that has been published and is of any importance in books, pamphlets, periodicals, magazines, and what not, so far as our subjects of study are concerned. There is much in all these other teachings that is good, but none of them go far enough (nor can they if they would) to give real information to the serious student, because this real and secret KNOWLEDGE, not guesswork, is not in the possession of these teachers or writers, no matter how many 'diplomas', 'charters', 'honours', or letters after their names, they advertise themselves with or how many "occult' books they have written. Instead of handing you such worthless baubles WE TEACH YOU OCCULT SCIENCE. 
We claim no mysterious predecessors and name them without any proof of our assertions, for all our Members names are kept for ever secret, from the highest to the lowest. We do not say that we are descended, or carry on the work, or have certain authorities handed down to us, from the heads of famous Orders of the past. When Madame Blavatsky began her work that led to the formation of the Theosophical Society she did not make any such claims either; there was no need because she had better means than those to expound TRUTH. What the real truth about her work is has never been told to the world yet; but you may take our word for it that that great Lady had more information of value, which she gave to the world, although the world has not even begun to realise or appreciate it, than anyone who came out into the open with such Teachings before her. If you have sufficient experience in such matters you will have to agree with what we have said so far in this Lecture. If you have no such previous experience you must take our word for it, for we know what we are saying. In either case you will have to admit that the Teachings we have presented you with so far, and the time, trouble, research work, cost of valuable books, Scientific magazines, and other publications that keep us well informed, both in print and online, and all these expenses and all this work is not recompensed by the minimum quarterly fee. 
We therefore trust that, if you are finding in our Teachings that which you are seeking, you will at the end of each completed Triangle send us a generous donation to enable us to carry on as we and you wish it--namely, in the most perfect manner possible. You will also, please try to form small groups. Unless our membership grows we cannot carry on for the reasons already stated, for there are always a number of students who drop out for reasons beyond their control, due to the daily exigencies of life in its never ending series of incidents, complications and adjustments. We add here and now that we sincerely hope that nothing will ever force you to give up the Divine Studies you are engaged in with us. Having said this, there is no urgency to form a group and such matters cannot be rushed. When the time is ripe the right people will appear. Nor should we attempt to coerce people into joining the Order; each and every individual must come to the Mysteries freely, of their own volition, with joy in their hearts. Others are not acceptable. We are not missionaries and we do not want our students to adopt such an attitude either. It is a great Blessing to lead those who genuinely seek towards the Truth; equally it is impossible (and a sin) to make others attempt to ‘see this Light. 
Before we continue our fascinating studies of the atom and kindred subjects let us rest for a few moments and see where we stand with our Teachings by comparing some of the statements of Science versus religion, and both these versus Occult Science. 
Science has always taken Theology to task, and has even ridiculed it for believing in the Union of three persons in one Godhead; One God as to substance, three persons as to individuality. The Occultist on the other hand is laughed at by the other two because he believes' in unproved and unprovable doctrines, and — as you will find in the later studies — in Angels and Devils, Gods and Spirits (although such appellations are often given only to demonstrate a Divine LAW, and not personalities). 
When the Scientists win the day over Theology they use the argument that neither the identity of God nor the triple individuality claimed — after having been conceived, invented and worked out in the depths of Theological Consciousness — could be proved to exist by any scientific inductive process of reasoning, least of all by the evidence of our senses. 
Science has said that Religion must perish, because it teaches 'mysteries'. Mystery being the negation of common sense (whatever that is) is repelled by Science. Tyndall has said that ‘Metaphysics' is fiction, like poetry. We say that that which passes for Metaphysics is not Metaphysics at all but consists of idle and ignorant speculations by Philosophers who have not studied the true Occult Science. The man of Science takes nothing on trust, rejects everything that is not 'proven' to him, while the Theologian accepts everything on blind 'faith'. Thus speaks Science in the last sentence. But the strange part of it all is that Science rejects one after another the things and theories previously ‘proven' when it penetrates further into the 'mysteries of matter. This is so today and has always been the same in the past from the first moment that 'Science' began to dogmatise about its various 'proven' facts and discoveries. The Occult Scientist on the other hand takes nothing whatever on trust, not even “exact' Science!! 
Until comparatively recent times, Science believed that the material universe was composed of Ether, Matter and Energy. In Chemistry the term 'ether' is used to designate a series of compounds which come under the heading of Alcohols and Ethers, and Chemists also use the term 'ether' to designate a particular member of the series, that is, Diethyl ether C2H5OC2H5. 
In physics, the concept of the Ether had its origin in the necessity for explaining the propagation of light and the existence of electric, magnetic and gravitational fields of force. When it became evident that light is a wave phenomenon, the search for a medium became imperative. While Sound does not traverse a vacuum, light does so perfectly; and electric, magnetic and gravitational attractions are not interrupted by removing the intervening air. Yet all attempts to corral and examine portions of the supposed residual substance and to ascertain its properties by direct observation have totally failed. If the Ether is actually a wave-propagating medium (said Science), the speed of the waves is such as to imply an extraordinarily great rigidity with a vanishingly small density. One mode of attack was to seek the evidence of an 'Ether Drift', that is, a relative motion of matter with respect to the Ether through which it moves; just as one travelling through air experiences a wind. The results of such quests proved to be ambiguous. 
The Michelson-Morley experiment (1887) gave a completely negative result. So did the Trouton-Noble experiment (1901–1903), which was an attempt to detect the electromagnetic effect of the motion of the electric charges in a condenser, as carried by the earth in its orbit. On the other hand, Airy's experiment on the aberration of light might be interpreted as indicating that when a transparent substance moves, the Ether is dragged along, not with the full speed of the moving matter, but with a fraction of that speed expressed by Fresnel's so called 'coefficient of drag'. The validity of this was attested by the experiments of Fizeau (1819–1896) on the propagation of light in rapidly moving water. 
The difficulties presented by such conflicting Scientific evidence' were avoided by Einstein, who in his theory of Relativity dispensed with all assumptions as to the supposed stationary Ether or motion with respect to it. It all boils down to the fact that Science does not know what Ether is, and one of its previous exponents ingeniously stated that it is a sort of mathematical substance which we are compelled to assume in order to account for the phenomena of light and heat'. However modern Scientific Dictionaries now dogmatically assert 'the theory that electromagnetic waves need such a medium for propagation are no longer tenable’!! We wonder if one day they will again change their minds and decide to recommence their search for this elusive medium? 
It is the same with Matter and Energy, Science does not know what they are and rejects one 'proven' theory after another with the regularity of the Four Seasons. 
T. H. Huxley, in his 'Physical Basis of Life' (1869) called Energy 'an empty shadow of my imagination'. (In fact, he was nearer to the truth than either he or Science realised then or now). 
Science rejects and scorns ‘Mystery' but, as Father Felix has truly said: 'She cannot escape it. Mystery is the fatality of Science', for Science and everything else in the material and the Spiritual is surrounded and penetrated by Mystery. 
Whether we call Energy 'erg', or centimetre-dyne in pure physics, or foot-pound in engineering, or kinetic energy, as with the motion of masses of matter, or recognise the existence of latent or potential energy, or accept Einstein's conclusions, or describe it as 'the capacity of a physical system to perform work' (as the latest scientific textbooks do), Science does not know what it really is. It is our privilege to explain these Mysteries to you, and you will find indications of this if you once more revise carefully the previous 12 Lectures. 
Our next Lecture will be prefaced by a special discussion on one of the most important Principles of Mysticism and the correct manipulation of it. That particular part of the next Lecture is written by the Supreme Grand Master of our Order. — Antares — himself. 
With best wishes, and awaiting your report, and also anything else you wish to say in connection with our Work. 
Your Hidden Master. 
