SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 12. 

Dear Disciple, 
We ended our 11th Lecture with a question mark. Who knows the Truth and sees all things and conditions as they really are, both materially and spiritually? Occult Science states that all material things are ILLUSION. If you have fully understood our very simple discussion at the end of our last Lecture (and we do not doubt that you have), you will agree at any rate that we do not see material things as they are. From our previous study of the atom you will have realised this already too. Even the atom itself is not what it seems to be to Science, and Science knows that this is so. 
During the last few decades Science has made enormous strides in nuclear studies resulting in some revelations which would have been considered amazing not so many years ago. But though Science continues to penetrate deeper and deeper into the mysteries of the atom, and to reveal yet more wonders, these are still only material discoveries; and whatever new facts future researches uncover, they will still be of a material nature. 
We have already given you some inkling what the real mysteries of the atom are. Each atom is simply a Kosmos, or Solar System in itself, and as complete in itself as our own Solar System with its Sun, the planets and their satellites, some dark and invisible and only known by their reactions on other heavenly bodies, others lit up by the Sun and reflecting its light, and many other things as well. But the real study of the atom and its real secrets cannot find a place in these early and elementary Lectures of ours. There is much else to be learned before we can touch upon these very great and astounding Occult Secrets. But you will admit that we have already given you some slight hints on the subject; hints that you must try to remember because they will help you to understand other secrets as we pass them before you in revue. 
The Grand Spiritual Truths are still more awe-inspiring, and with regard to these you must try to remember that we are in the centre, and that there are Seven Regions above and seven below. Each of these Realms is filled with thousands of millions of pre- or post-human personalities; or in other words with beings who have had no human incarnations as yet, but must eventually reach that state of evolution, and with beings who have lived on earth as humans and are now in a state of rest or activity between their last and the next incarnation, or who have passed on to such a high state of evolution, Wisdom and Purity that they need not -- or cannot-take human shape again. Why this is the case with the latter you will learn anon. 
The very fact that we are able to discuss these things, added to the fact that you will understand them and may be able to agree with us, paves the way to an answer to the question we posed at the end of Lecture 11. 
The true answer is, of course, that only the scientifically trained Mystic, Occultist, Seer, Sage or whatever else you may wish to call such a person is able to see things and conditions, material and spiritual, as they really are. This then, is the aim of our present studies. You are anxious, we presume, to learn the technique of seeing and hearing truly, and we are doing our best to prepare you for this by unfolding to you the Ancient Wisdom, and by giving you certain exercises for the purpose of learning to see and hear etc. 
We spoke of atomic energy in our last Lecture. Well, just to give you a few illustrations: one pound of any substance completely converted into energy would propel the largest oil tanker 400 times round the world, drive a car 180,000 times round the earth or run an electric iron for a million years! Even the most powerful rockets in the world, such as those used in the Viking and Voyager missions to Mars and Jupiter, would be but toys compared with those powered with nuclear rocket engines should Science succeed in its various experiments in this direction. 
In this connection Scientists are currently exploring the so-called 'fourth state of matter', plasma, which emerges when the third state, gas, is heated to temperatures of many thousands of degrees. In the plasma state particles move in a manner which is difficult to control. If Scientists could manage to compel particles of such light substances as hydrogen to unite, their vast potential energy would be released. It has been suggested that if confined and harnessed, this energy would supply the world's needs for some 20,000 million years! Incredibly high temperatures are needed to achieve such concepts and as yet no method has been found for sustaining these temperatures and controlling the plasma. The technology involved in these researches is called Magneto hydro-dynamics (MHD). 
When this Lecture was first written over sixty years ago, we said that the old dream of the alchemists had been replaced by the new one of modern science. Instead of transmuting base metals into gold the release of atomic energy, so as to make it available for heating, lighting and running engines, was the new dream. It was a far more alluring ideal than the making of unlimited heaps of gold. The release and harnessing of atomic energy could place such forces at the command of man that there would be hardly any limit to Man's Powers. He could have perpetual daylight, keep the surface of the whole globe at a genial and even temperature, control the winds by raising or lowering the temperature over great stretches of the earth's surface, explore the depths of both earth and sea, rule the skies completely, and even learn to control himself.......perhaps!! 
Regrettably, one of the first things Man did when he found the secret was to use it for the purpose of destroying his fellow-man and brother on an even larger scale than he had done previously. There was an idealistic, though feasible dream in our early comments, and some Scientists today are trying to bring this dream to reality — but the nightmare of ‘nuclear armaments' was certainly not exaggerated. 
When Science bombards the atom by means of alpha and other particles, and with the aid of electricity, it uses one of the greatest powers in nature. You will be told later what electricity really is; Science does not know, but Occult Science does. Electricity is the medium used by nature to release the energy of the atom. Next time you listen to a thunderstorm you should observe the various sounds produced by the bursting of the atoms in the air, after they have been struck by great streams of electricity in the form of lightning. Not long ago Science stated that the noise of thunder was caused by the rushing together of the air which had been split by the lightning — nonsense! If air rushes to close the gap where an 'air-pocket' has been produced in this manner we should always be hearing thunder, for the air is full of such air pockets. Ask anyone who has been 'air-sick' when travelling in an aeroplane if this is not so! 
In order to account for thunder, Science actually produced four principal theories during the 20th century, the most recent of which has been officially accepted ever since it was described by Prof. Herbert Riehl ('Introduction to the Atmosphere published by McGraw-Hill in 1965), who asserted that: "A lightning stroke heats the air along its path to as much as 10,000°C. Tremendous expansion of the air column follows, sending a vibrating pressure wave outward. This wave, moving at almost 1,000 ft. per second, that is, at the speed of sound, makes the noise known as thunder.”! Prof. A. E. Few of Rice University, Houston, U.S.A. confirmed this in 1975 (Scientific American) when he said: “We now know this last explanation is the correct one."!! 
The most recent scientific sources consulted in 2010 all agree that: “Thunder is produced by the explosive expansion of heated air surrounding a lightning channel." Again we say-nonsense!!! 
What really happens is that there are a variety of gasses in the air. Each gas is composed of atoms with a different number of electrons according to the nature of each element. Hydrogen has only one electron in each atom, helium two, oxygen has eight, nitrogen has seven, neon has ten, argon has 18 and so on. When lightning strikes and destroys masses of hydrogen atoms and releases their energy we hear a series of sharp detonations, such as might be caused by rifle fire. Other atoms, such as helium perhaps, produce the sound of a lot of tin kettles tumbling down rocky chasms, such as Cheddar Gorge!! Yet others sound like big drums or tympanies (these may be the heavier atoms like Krypton with 26 and Xenon with 54 electrons in each atom). The more electrons there are in an atom the heavier its mass and the greater its energy. The greater the energy the louder the explosion when this energy is released. 
Here then, you have an explanation of the noise of thunder such as you have not heard before, because it has always been kept secret, and neither Science nor any other Occult School knows anything about it. But the noise is only a by-product of the real effects caused by lightning's bursting of the atoms. What it really does is to release the atom's energy so that it can be used by various living organisms by means of its manipulation by certain intelligent forces in Nature about which you will hear a great deal in the future. Watch your flowers, and especially young growing shoots of plants after a thunderstorm, and you will see how they have suddenly expanded into a larger size with added vitality. Notice the after effects of such a storm on yourself and realise how much you are refreshed and energised. This is not caused by the refreshing rain which generally accompanies a thunderstorm; that rain only cools the air, but your new energy comes from the forces released by the bursting atoms. This is another secret known only to our Order. And all this contained in particles so small that the mind can have no true conception of their actual tenuity or smallness. In spite of this they have been measured in various ways. The diameter of an atom is less than 100,000,000th part of an inch (it is normally expressed as 10%). We could perhaps imagine one-hundredth of an inch if we look at a ruler in which the inch is divided into tenths. In the tenth of a tenth of an inch well over one million atoms could be placed side by side or, it would take more than one million of them, edge to edge, to equal the thickness of this page. 
As a matter of comparison, a golf ball is as much larger than the atom as the Earth is larger than a golf ball, or perhaps the size of an atom becomes more comprehensible if we say that the Earth is made up of as many cubic inches as there are atoms in a single cubic inch. And in a cubic inch we can pack a quadrillion of atoms, which figure is expressed by a 1 followed by 24 noughts (1024)!! 
To count atoms contained in a cubic inch one by one is far beyond the bounds of possibility. But if the atoms contained in one cubic inch could be passed through a fine nozzle at the rate of one million per second it seems as if we should soon be able to account for all the atoms in a cubic inch. But this is another illusion. A year is roughly 32 million seconds. In a year therefore, 32 billion atoms would pass through the nozzle. At that rate it would take about 14 million years for that small mass — a cubic inch — of atoms to pass through. 
You will agree that it is necessary to have some idea of what the material seems to be (if you have not already come to that conclusion) before we can even begin to study the extension of the material towards the spiritual in any direction. What we have been discussing are not vain mystical dreams and imaginings but scientific facts. The only difference between Science and Occult Science is that Science sees material facts, and Occult Science knows the TRUTH. 
Please have another look at your previous Lectures and do not forget your various exercises etc., for after the next Lecture we shall ask you for a report. 
May the Blessings of the Cosmic Good be yours. 
Your Hidden Master. 
