SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 14. 

Dear Disciple, 
It is not our intention to add to the words of Antares – our Beloved Hierophant — but your Master of this Grade hopes you will ponder well over the powerful Principle presented to you by him in this 14th Lecture of the 1st Grade. 
It is an old and little known Occult Law, and if you take it up and practise it you will find in time that it will do for you just that which you have been told. True Charity is one of the finest means of Service you can practise; it is in fact, the greatest, for it embodies many other Principles leading to Illumination. It contains that great Love which can change a man or woman to such an extent that they are no longer recognisable as the same person. 
Cicero has said that 'A mind without instruction can no more bear fruit than a field, however fertile, without cultivation'. It is the cultivation of the Higher Mind that interests us most as students of Occult Science, and we cannot work too hard in each incarnation if we wish to make the greatest possible progress towards the Blazing Light of true Knowledge and Understanding in which is contained all Instruction - Divine and Temporal. 
We must now return to our study of the atom and give you some further details before we turn to other important subjects. The atom may seem to be so small a thing that there can hardly be any space in it. The Scientists of olden times conceived it to be an inert particle as completely filled with matter and as solid as any piece of metal seems to be. But when we come to measure an electron a different story un folds itself. The diameter of an electron is 0.14 of a billionth of an inch or a seven-billionth of an inch. If it were possible to place electrons in a straight row it would take seven billion of them to reach the length of one inch. In other words the diameter of an electron is 0.00000000000014 inch. 
Such a distance is many times less than the diameter of a hydrogen atom; it is only 1/70,000th as great. We can also state it in another way by saying that the diameter of a hydrogen atom is 70,000 times as great as that of an electron. We are simplifying these details as much as we possibly can, as the calculations of the mass of electrons can only be given scientifically by means of certain formulae which are unnecessary for our purpose here. Any of our students with scientific training can easily look up further details if he wishes to do so, but we don't consider this necessary, for Science, despite its tremendous advances in the field of nuclear research, still flounders, and has not the information Occult Science has, and will make known to you later on. At present we want to draw you a mind-picture of the conditions within the atom, so that you may easily follow the development of our Thema in times to come. 
The distance in a hydrogen atom (with its single electron) from the nucleus to the electron is about 17,000 times the diameter of the electron. If for instance, our earth were the only planet in our Solar System, it would need 17,000 planets the same size as our earth (if we place them all in a straight row) to fill the space between the earth and the Sun. Or, continuing our analogy, the single electron in a hydrogen atom is over twice as far away from the nucleus as our earth is from the Sun. As our Solar System is constructed in the same way as an atom with seven electrons you will see the comparison (never mind the fact that there are more than seven planets in our Solar System—this is a subject for later discussions). The greater part of an atom is therefore empty space, even when there are 92 electrons in it, as in Uranium. 
We can magnify the atom in our imagination, in order to get a picture of it, in another way, and if we say that the diameter of an electron is a yard, its distance from the nucleus (or Sun) then becomes 17,000 yards, or about ten miles. This gives us a sphere (the electron), a yard in diameter, circling around another sphere (the nucleus), ten miles away. Apart from this electron and the nucleus the rest of a hydrogen atom is empty space, or all but one part in five billion is empty space within the atom. 
As we have no secrets to withhold from our students we will tell you here and now why we are continually drawing you pictures of the conditions within the atom, at the same time comparing them with our Solar System and with illustrations of material objects. 
One of the reasons is that all the time we are doing this we are helping you to unfold unconsciously your powers of projection or extension of consciousness. By trying to follow our descriptions of the insides of the atoms you are projecting your thoughts there by means of your Higher Mind. By the time we arrive at the actual study of astral projection and extension of consciousness you will have learned the trick of it without knowing it. As you are now in the fourth month of our studies we consider it the right time to tell you this. For astral projections and extensions of consciousness it will not be necessary later to give you so-called special exercises to enable you to jump, creep or soar out of your material body in order to roam in the astral gloom, 
or within the domains of the air of our planet. The idea of thus leaving your body helpless whilst you go wandering about has frightened the life out of a good many students of the Occult, who were afraid they'd never get back inside themselves!! We do not instruct our students in such an ignorant and unpleasant manner. We have better methods than those, and ours WORK! If you have studied and absorbed our previous Lectures carefully and sincerely you have already extended your consciousness into other realms on several occasions, and you may have had several astral projections too, although you were not aware of them. The true mechanics of these really simple faculties of the Higher Mind you will learn in good time. But do not worry about them, you will find them safe and easy. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
N.B. Please carry on for four more weeks with the exercises on seeing colours and hearing overtones. At the end of that period we request a report on the developments you have noticed within, and also If you have experienced any particular phenomena during these exercises, no matter what they were, or how seemingly unimportant. Continue also the exercises on Peace, Power and Secrecy. Do not become impatient if at first you do not succeed. These five exercises should keep you very busy. 
