SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER 

Grade 1. Number 26. 
Dear Disciple, 
Well — this Lecture completes the second Sacred Triangle of our work. We think that during the last six months we have taken you upwards with us to realms so high that in the usual course of Occult Studies (although there are none really like ours) it would have taken you several years before you would have been even allowed to touch on these elevated subjects. 
Yet — you have completed only two sides of the first Holy Pyramid consisting of four triangles in our studies! If you can stay the course with us for the first three Grades, the work of the Outer Circle, you will have built with us three complete pyramids. You will then know the outer appearance of these pyramids; but what a structure they represent if we consider the three as one! In Egypt there are three pyramids of Gizeh, as you know, representing the same three Grades outwardly that you have been studying with us. These three great pyramids were once covered on all sides from top to bottom, with the Sacred Hieroglyphics setting forth the Holy Teachings. The Common people interpreted them in one way; the priests and their disciples knew their inner meaning up to a point (our Outer Grades), which was veiled from the rest of the world. But only the Inner Circle of the Supreme Council, consisting of the Great Hierophant and his staff of Adepts knew the third and inmost meaning of these writings on the walls!! 
So it is, of necessity, with our work. 
Suppose a person finds one or two of our Lectures and reads them, or even if he reads a dozen or more, if such a person is not a trained Occultist he will see but the outermost meaning of our words; if he knows something about our subject he may obtain glimpses here and there of what we are hinting at. But in no instance will it be possible for him to discover the meaning that you can find in it already if you have been a faithful Student and worked at your various exercises as instructed by us. 
For by means of the accumulation of certain powers of Peace, Secrecy, the study of colour and sound, and so on, you will (if you have carried out the work as you should have attuned not only with us, but with certain of the Higher Principles of the Cosmic Realms; and though you may not yet have mastered completely the Principles of Peace etc. just mentioned, you will have made at least a beginning with the opening up of your Inner Perceptions, and you will be no longer the morson you were six months ago. You will have begun to feel a same certain sense of mastery of your Outer self, and you will look at the world and its inhabitants with different eyes than you did before. Is that not so? 
Even if you have only read the Lectures you will have found much food for thought in them; and even if you have rejected all or much that we have told you (which you are at liberty to do), you could not have done so without thinking the matter over, and thinking at the same time of things you have not thought of before; for there are certain things in our Lectures which have never been discussed by anyone outside our Order in this present age. 
Please do not think that we are blowing your or our own trumpet. You would be wrong. There is no need for us to blow our own trumpet, for we remain Hidden by choice, and such a one does not make his presence known by blaring and blatant noises!! We do not blow a trumpet for you either, for the only things we request and expect from you are perseverance, sincerity and progress. In the latter words lie hidden the excuses for all the trumpet blowing anyone may wish for. (But you would not need to blow your trumpet either, nor would you wish to do so). 
Not having given up your studies after you completed the first Sacred Triangle, you must have realised that we, from our side, do all we can in helping you to progress, and no one could ever doubt our sincerity. That, at least, stands revealed in all our Lectures from beginning to end. 
As you proceed with us you will become more and more aware of this Sincerity, and of the purpose behind our work. We will not say what this purpose is; you should discover it for yourself. But we have driven you fairly hard these first six months, and that is the reason why we are now having a quiet little chat among ourselves in this Lecture. As the work goes on it becomes more and more intricate; for all we have said so far are but introductions to these subjects. All of them have to be worked out in great detail, and when it was first decided to commence the work of this Order, many, many years ago, the Supreme Council of that time was almost in despair when it considered the vast number of subjects it was necessary to study with our Members and the short time which was at the disposal of both our Teachers and Students. For in the first three years alone the ground is fairly well covered, and all the most essential things needed for the development of the student and his preparation for the inner work are included in these 150 Lectures. It would be an easy matter to spread them over 15,000 Lectures, and then having failed to cover all the necessary subjects! 
For this reason the Lectures are very condensed in every way, and it needs sincere and hard application on the part of the Students to do all the exercises and learn to become familiar with the ideas, teachings and Laws presented to them. These are different in many subtle ways from anything taught along these lines. We expect our Students to be subtle enough to see these differences and to feel that in them lies the secret between fictitious ‘teachings' and the truth. 
We do not give you a number of 'affirmations', 'mantrams', 'vowel sounds', and other things that cannot help a Student, unless he is under the constant personal supervision of an Adept. To hear certain students of occultism bawl forth these vowel sounds and stupid affirmations; to watch them try the 'power of their vision' when they gaze at drops of oil or match sticks floating in a bowl of water till their eyes nearly drop out of their sockets with the useless endeavour to make these drops or sticks move about by means of the 'powerful rays' that are supposed to shoot from their eyes, to hear them proclaim triumphantly that they have succeeded at last, when it is only the snorts of air from their nostrils, due to heavy‘concentration' which have done the trick, is painful in the extreme to a sincere person who knows the utter futility of all this balderdash. That is not the way to become a trained Occultist; nor is it any use to pommel your solar plexus, jerk your limbs in every direction of the compass, or up and down, sit in ridiculous postures, or to stand on your head for six weeks or on one leg for a year like a petrified stork. None of these things is of any use. 
Can you see a Holy Being like our Lord Jesus Christ perform such antics? Yet was there ever a greater Master of the Occult than He? Or of mysticism, or of whatever else you may like to think? No!! HE was a student of the Mystery Schools of Egypt and India up to His 30th year of age, and when He had, with the aid of inspiration and Divine Guidance, conquered all the Laws, and also Himself, He was fit to go forth and teach the world the simple Law of LOVE THY NEIGHBOUR, which His followers carried into execution by hating all those who were not dogmatic enough to agree with their wrong interpretation of His Holy Law, and by murdering their fellow men in millions in the name of the Holy Mandate of our sweet Lord and Master: Jesus the Christos; a Son of God!!! 
Material objects can be moved by means of the human Will, which can set in operation some of the material laws. But this needs long 
training under a special Master, and away from the world of men in a secluded spot. Matter cannot be moved by means of ‘rays' that issue forth from your eyes, nor can you move material things by means of spiritual principles, unless you have become as great and powerful as one of the great Adepts, who act as direct agents for the Creative Principles within the Kosmos. 
We were not joking when we referred to the useless efforts of students who are wrongly told by their teachers that in a few months they will be able to operate such great Material and Spiritual Laws. We may smile grimly and give vent to our righteous indignation by holding such things up to ridicule; they deserve nothing else. The people who teach their pupils such things use cheap and nasty methods, and the running of such 'Orders' or 'groups' is nothing else than a form of 'big business'. Not so long ago we saw the 'glossy' website of such an Order purporting to represent the 'Hidden Masters' and mysterious 'illuminati' forsooth, with a business name to write to. This was a great mistake, we think: for after a little research anyone could do we found that the company behind this organisation was owned by a proper 'tough guy' with 'form' as the Police call a criminal record, out for himself alone in the way of 'easy money' and 'plenty of glory'. 
No person can say either of these things about the Heads of The Order, for they do not want any fame or glory, and our fees are kept at the lowest possible level and hardly pay for our running expenses. We can keep going only by means of the generosity of our Students when they send us their voluntary donations; and when we compare our work with that of others we know that we have earned such considerations; and the discerning Student will agree with us. 
To enable us to keep our Order on a safe financial footing is true service; for if you are satisfied that our teachings have benefited you in some way or another during the short time you have been with us as an honoured member, you will help spread the work to others who also stand in need of such enlightenment. Not everyone is able to give largely, and we do not expect our members to make sacrifices; but some can help more than others, and if those who have much give in accordance with their status, the ones who can afford only a little will be helped by them in the right way; for it will enable us to carry on. 
We said a few minutes ago that Jesus was a Son of God. Thus He describes Himself according to the Holy Records; but later on the translators altered it to the Son of God. This is wrong. We are all children of the Father, including the highest messengers from the Divine World the world has ever known. 
When we arrive at the moment when, in our Lectures, we reveal to you how Man was first created, and the various stages of his early development, followed by the times — much later — when the “Sons of Light, or the Gods, walked on this earth among men and taught them all the Arts and Sciences, which were forgotten later (and have never been recovered yet, in spite of our much vaunted present times of 'progress', civilisation', 'technology and what not), you will be truly delighted to learn these things, and you will then know how we were all created by the Gods, and the time for merely believing these things will be past. The history of the Creation of Man is absolutely fascinating and very intricate as you may believe now; but it forms only a small section of our Studies. 
In the next Lecture we will give you the first outline of the paths to the Sun and the Moon. In other words, we will tell you some of the things that happen when you leave this abode of sorrow and abomination and proceed to the spheres of Absolute Bliss — if you are prepared or worthy, and we will also tell you of the other regions where discarnate Minds (not Souls) dwell between their incarnations as humans. This subject should be of great interest to everybody of course, and you may have read a great number of theories about it; but this time you will learn the truth; although here again it will be the 'first round only for the time being, as the subject is too vast to cover in a few Lectures of the First Grade of our Order. But we shall unfold the whole marvellous scheme to you in a gradual manner, so that you will attain to a complete understanding of it in the end. 
We said at the beginning of this Lecture that we were going to have a quiet chat with you. But if you read it over again carefully you will see that in spite of this we have introduced quite a number of important subjects. 

Now, please, have a look at all your previous Lectures, for there is much more in them than meets the eye at even a tenth reading. When you have re-read them tell us all that we have asked you to during the last five; and also anything else you wish to say in reference to our Studies. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
