SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER 
Grade 1. Number 22. 

Dear Disciple, 
We said at the end of our last lecture that we would continue our discussion on the subject of animal 'Souls'. 
You will remember that previously we have told you that the life principle descends from the highest to the lowest. By this we meant the lowest forms of existence on earth — which is the mineral kingdom. The sparks from the eternal flame descend from the highest Celestial Realms into the lowest forms of earthly matter, giving these forms life and setting in motion the electrons within the atoms. There is a mysterious fire in everything! You have learned of the terrific volume of heat that can be released from the nucleus of any atom by artificial means in the laboratory, and by natural means in the case of radium etc., and by the force of lightning. Well then, that heat or fire, or flame or whatever you wish to call it, is present in all inorganic matter. By means of slow solution processes, by the action of water, the atoms and molecules are released gradually from the main mass of matter. Huge mountains are ground down slowly by snow, ice, rain and heat; Science tells us for instance that Mount Ben Nevis was once 20 times as high as it is now. These atoms and molecules, in the form of various minerals etc., become food for plants, and so they have taken one step upwards in evolution. Some of the plants are eaten by animals and form the body of these animals, this body is called the lower mind, and the atoms have gone up another step, so to say. 
So far, so good. But is that living fire the soul of a stone, plant or animal? No it is not. It is the life principle; latent more or less in the stone or any other matter, more active in the plants and animals, being the agent in plants and animals to give unto their respective bodies life and warmth to a lesser or greater degree, which life and warmth assists them to grow to maturity and to keep those bodies alive until the Laws of Nature (or accident) causes this fire to leave these bodies, upon which they are said to be dead. 
As soon as the atoms of the mineral kingdom combine in such a manner (very primitive at first) that they form an organic structure of the lowest kind, such as a simple living cell for instance, the creators add to it a new principle, which is called Consciousness. But this consciousness is so crude in the lowest form of life that we can hardly compare it with the consciousness of more evolved and complicated living bodies. All that this consciousness does is to see that sufficient food is collected to keep the body in repair, so that it can live on for its appointed span of life and for multiplication purposes. 
This consciousness has a mind all its own which, as we have said already, is called the lower mind. As the living organism develops during millenniums of millions of ages (remember the half-life period of Uranium - 4,500,000,000 years, from which you may gather some idea of the age of our planet, for this half-life period goes on inderinitely, and why in the name of sense does Science not yet realise from this fact alone how incredibly old our Earth is?), and when the said organism becomes more complicated, this lower mind grows with it, in fuller and fuller consciousness and acquires various instincts. When at last we reach the stage where the organism has developed from stone or mineral, via plant life, in and out of water, into a mammalian, the consciousness of the lower mind has already reached a very high degree of perfection. 
When we come to the apes and other animals with a high degree of intelligence, which is a natural development of the lower mind and the slowly and painfully acquired instincts, and it then has very complicated bodily and instinctive functions, we have reached the highest stage of evolution an animal can reach, and there are often already very strong indications of an incipient higher mind being present in many cases. Look at the 'soulful' expression in the eyes of some dogs, look at the unfathomable depths within the eyes of a deer for example, and you will see what we mean. When the animal ‘dies' the lower mind exists for a while in an astral form in one of the astral regions nearest the earth-plane, either one degree above or one degree below, and then this astral body disintegrates slowly, and its component parts are dissolved into the matter of which such regions are composed. 
The vital spark, the life principle however, is reincarnated within the body of a new animal to be born; or in the foetus, in other words; there it stays and with its warmth it assists the growth of the new animal to be. This may happen many thousands of times, until the moment arrives when the lower mind consciousness of the animal has become so perfected by the preliminary contacts with its future higher mind, that it is now ready for the next step upwards, and the spark enters the foetus of a human entity in one of the lowest and most primitive orders of man. It need not necessarily enter the body of a savage, but it can commence its long series of human incarnations as a member of that low class of intelligence one may find amongst the great masses of mankind who are destined to perform the lowest sort of manual labour, requiring no intellect, or very little. Then - the next principle is definitely added to the spark and lower mind, and this next principle is called the Higher Mind, no matter on what slow and low 
wavelength it operates at first, so far as intelligence is concerned. 
Do not jump to the conclusion, please, that we mean that you — the Real Divine YOU, represented by the Positive Soul and the Negative Higher Mind — have ever been a cairngorm, cantaloupe, caterpillar, carp or camel, for then you would be as wrong as Darwin himself. We are talking here about the evolution of the organism in which your Higher Mind now dwells. 
You will understand that the road for these beginners (wrongly called 'young souls') is very long indeed. There are thousands of cycles of incarnations required before the Higher Mind begins to function at all in a really intelligent and spiritual manner. But once the Higher Mind is added definitely and completely to the other two principles, it must go on, one way or another. It is reborn again and again and, as we said before, it has a watcher, sentry or guide always with it, whether the Higher mind is in or out of a human body, for that guide — the Divine Soul — cannot leave it for the reason that the Soul is the better half, as it were, of the Higher Mind. 
You will see thus that both the Soul and the Higher Mind are of Divine Origin, and are linked together in such a manner that the bonds can never be broken, unless the Higher Mind will not learn to attune with the Soul, and overcome and tame the lower mind, in which case a separation does take place. But how that happens is a subject reserved for the much higher teachings of our Order, and we must study a host of other things before we can touch upon this Sacred Law again, and explain it in full. The same remark applies to how and when the principles of Higher and Lower Minds are connected with the life principle and what they all really are. The above is only a first and general introduction of these subjects for your mind to dwell on for the time being.
The amount of heat — the life force or Divine Spark — which is present in a healthy human or animal body is colossal. In the case of persons of low or medium intellect or evolution it takes days sometimes before it has all left the human body after death. This often applies to even the most intelligent persons, when there is an actual fear of death, due either to ignorance of the wonderful conditions of the Higher Spheres to which the Higher Mind, accompanied by the Divine Soul can escape from this material abode, to reluctance to leave the earth realm and all the beings and things the mind loves, or to the tenacious grip the lower mind has on life, from which it does not want to depart, knowing instinctively that it must fade after the body (with which it is one) dies. In the case of persons who know the Laws as Mystics of great understanding and knowledge of the Wisdom of Occult Science all the heat of the body may evaporate in great waves in a few hours; for the Higher Mind, being in greater control of all its faculties cannot then be retarded by the lower mind, and it forces the latter to release its grip on bodily life. Many Native Tribes believe that it takes seven days for the spirit of man to leave the body. This is a crude notion, but it is based on fact. 
The wise man, or woman, has no desire to dwell any longer on the material plane than they must in order to carry out such duties or work for which they have been sent into incarnation, whether compulsory or otherwise. They know of the bliss that awaits them amongst their kindred, and long for the day of re-union with those whom they love and who have gone on before. 
With regard to the actual formation of material bodies on earth, we accept the doctrine of Aristotle, who was a great Adept. He stated that there are three principles of natural bodies; privation, matter and form. The privation of the plant, animal or human being to be, is located in the invisible Mind of the Great Architect of the Universe, privation not being considered in the Aristotelian philosophy as a principle in the commission of bodies, but as an external property in their production; for the production is a change by which matter passes from the shape it has not to that which it assumes. Though the privation, prototype or thought-form of the unborn child's shape, as well as of the future form of an unmade building, picture, stature or watch, is that which is neither substance nor extension, nor quality as yet, nor any kind of material existence on earth, it is still something which is, though its outlines, in order to be, must acquire an objective form; the abstract must become concrete, in short. Thus, as soon as this privation of matter, this thought-form, is transmitted by energy to the universal ether, it becomes a material form, however sublimated. 
If modern Science teaches that human thought ‘affects the matter of another universe simultaneously with this', how can he who believes in an intelligent First Cause deny that the Divine Thought is equally transmitted by the same Law of Energy to our common mediator, the Universal Ether; or that which has been called, and is, the World Soul? And, if so, then it must follow that once there, the Divine Thought manifests itself objectively, energy faithfully reproducing the outlines of that whose 'privation' was first born in the Divine Mind. Only it must not be understood that this thought created matter. No; it creates but the design for the future form, the matter which serves to make this design having always been in existence, and having been prepared to form a human body through a series of progressive transformations, as the result of evolution. 
Forms pass; the ideas that created them and the material which gave them objectivity remain. These models, as yet devoid of immortal spirit, are 'elementals', or properly speaking, psychic embryos, which, when their time arrives, die out of the invisible world and are born in this visible one as human infants, receiving in transitu that divine breath called 'spirit', which completes the perfect man. This class of psychic embryos cannot communicate objectively with man. 
In the 'Transactions of the Medical Society', published many years ago, appears the following paragraph: ‘One of the most formidable obstacles to the advancement of Science....has ever been a blind submission to authority.... To untrammel the mind from the influence of mere authority, that it may have free scope in the investigation of facts and laws which exist and are established in nature, is the grand antecedent necessary to scientific discovery and permanent progress'. 
Grand words; most eminently TRUE! 
But has 'Science' ever investigated the 'facts and laws which exist in nature' such as we have been discussing with you in these early lectures of ours? 
Is it not true that when one makes known an unknown fact or law, that one is confronted with the question; 'What is your authority for saying this or that? 
By their fruits shall ye know them; but do not forget that the tree which bears the most and best fruit has most stones thrown at it!! 
Forget about ‘authorities', who are mostly mumbling and impotent old fossils, and remember that the Teachings which help you most are those which make you think most. And we venture to presume that even in these few lectures we have given you much to think about, although we have quoted very few `authorities' as yet! 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
