SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER 
Grade 1. Number 24. 

Dear Disciple, 
In our last lecture we have discussed an easy way of extending your Consciousness to Higher Realms. You will understand that we are gradually introducing the Principle in question, and we want to say now that in time to come we will add new ways of learning the way of escape from the material, so that you should not be under the impression that the last word has been said about it already. Far from it: there are many revelations to come in this direction. You will remember that we have so often insisted on the importance of Peace, Power and Secrecy. When you eventually attain the Secret Power of Peace, you will then have learned also how to relax. To relax is very easy to some people; to many others it is very difficult, and we have as yet given you no exercises which will lead to a completely relaxed condition; for you cannot relax properly unless you are at Peace first. 
To be at Peace, real Peace, is one of the most difficult things to acquire — that is why we commenced our very first lecture with it, so that you should have plenty of time to learn to be at Peace before you come to the more intricate exercises. Why should we commence with the most difficult thing first, you may ask; why did we not give you some easier exercises first which would lead up gradually to that difficult attainment? 
Many, many years ago we knew a young violinist who was forced to learn to play the violin against his will or inclination, although he was a great lover of music since he was but a little child. The practising of many finger and other exercises which were needed to develop the various muscles used in the mastering of that most difficult of all musical instruments, bored him to tears. He therefore invented a method of learning to play the violin all his own. He managed to get hold of some of the most difficult studies, virtuoso pieces and concertos it was possible to find, and he started to practise those in secret. In a remarkably short time he astounded his teacher by being able to play any piece of violin music that was placed before him, much to his own secret delight. Although he had of course, not sufficient technique or musicianship to play the works he was practising by himself in any way near perfection, yet he had acquired in a very short time, a much wider outlook musically than he could have had if he had gone through the ordinary drudgery of early violin exercises. Not only that, but he acquired an actual interest in his studies, for he could now see possibilities which are hidden from the average beginner. He was no longer bored to death, but kept on assiduously with his secret practising and ended up as a really brilliant and well-known soloist in the end, and became a fine musician in every way. We can vouch for me truth of this story, for we knew him quite well, and he has often talked to the present writer with amusement about his 'daft' way of learns to become a virtuoso. 
Now we have followed a similar system in the course of our lectures, although not in imitation, and it has never failed yet. We have not bored you to death with all sorts of elementary trash, but have trusted to your intelligence and perseverance by starting you off with that which is the most difficult thing in the whole range of Occult Study — to become able to be really at Peace within, whenever outside conditions seem to become overwhelming in their complications. 
We have also given you a great test in this way, which will show us the latent talents you may have in the way of spiritual development. 
If during those 23 weeks you have succeeded in mastering the technique you have produced a Miracle which not one person in a hundred thousand, or we might say without exaggeration, one in a million, could achieve. If you have not succeeded at all times in getting sufficient command of all your inner faculties to be at Peace whenever you wish — then carry on trying. You will succeed in the end if you persevere, and then your Secret Power will be very great indeed, and you will influence and master all those with whom you come in contact in your daily life. 
And now we will give you one bit of advice which will help you to attain that inner Peace; you must see that you are completely relaxed before you concentrate on Peace. This is not easy, for you will find by observation that there is always some part of your body which is unrelaxed or tense in some way; especially when you are sitting down or leaning against some object. The best way to learn to relax is to lie down on a comfortable bed, but see that you do not fall asleep!! Watch all your muscles in every part of your body mentally. There should be a complete feeling of 'deadness' everywhere, and it should be quite an effort to move or raise any of your limbs or your head. This applies to the whole of your body. If you are lying with your head on a pillow or cushion which makes it necessary to stretch your neck or throat muscles in any way you are not relaxed, even if everything else feels at ease. If there is any feeling of tightness about the back or chest, or if anything presses anywhere against your body you are not relaxed. You must become a dead weight in every sense of the word; like a bag of sand, or a sack of potatoes, if the simile does not offend your susceptibilities (if it does you are not at Peace within either, for an Occult student should be above such trifles). Even your mind must be relaxed, and you must cease to think or worry about anything especially yourself, and still more so when once you are satisfied that your body is properly relaxed at last. 
This is a very important exercise!! 
Watch out and see what happens to you (without straining your mind or trying to see or hear anything whatsoever) when once you have succeeded in that complete and utter relaxation of body and mind, and report to us after the 26th lecture, which is the end of this step in the present grade and is the completion of the second triangle of the first grade. We shall not give you any hints as to what you may expect, for it will be different for each student. We ask you to carry on also with the rest of the exercises and report progress at the same time, for we consider the completion of the first two triangles a very important stage in your development. 
Whatever your experiences are; do not be misled by the bogey of 'imagination'. After all, what is imagination? It is a well-known fact that material imagination can stunt the growth or destroy the life of the foetus; it can also influence the physical appearance and the mental condition of the child to be born. There are reasons for these things happening, but they are due to extra-terrestrial influences acting on the mind of the mother-to-be. There have been surgeons who have devoted their lives and fortunes to find the cause for such malformations and other peculiarities, but they have only reached the opinion that they are mere 'coincidences', because they will not realise that behind the conditions of the material, the forces of the Spirit are at work. It would also be highly unphilosophical to say that animals are not endowed with this same 'imagination'; and while it might be considered the acme of metaphysical speculation to formulate the idea that members of the vegetable kingdom — say the mimosas and the group of insect catchers – have an instinct and a rudimentary imagination of their own, yet the idea is not without its advocates. If great physicists like Tyndall are forced to confess that even in the case of intelligent and speaking man they are unable to bridge the chasm between mind and matter, and define the powers of 'imagination', how much greater must be the mystery of what takes place in the brain of a 'dumb' animal or in the sensory nerve system of a plant? 
What is imagination? Psychologists tell us that it is the plastic or creative power of the soul (by which they mean the Higher Mind, which can also take its messages from the Soul); but materialists confound it writh fancy — and what is that? The radical difference between the two words (imagination and fancy) has been so thoroughly indicated ho Wordsworth, in the preface to his 'Lyrical Ballads', that it is no longer excusable to interchange the words. Imagination, said Pythagoras, was the remembrance of precedent spiritual, mental and physical states, while fancy is the disorderly production of the material brain. 
Your Masters proclaim that 'imagination' is a state of 'seeing bevond' the material if directed to the spiritual realms, and 'fancy' can be, under certain conditions, its twin sister! 
As for matter itself — or the material in which we are all im prisoned — the world-old philosophy that it was vivified and fructified by the Eternal IDEA, or 'Imagination', a ‘seeing beyond' from Spirit to Matter, the abstract outlining and preparing of the model for the 
concrete form — is unavoidable. 
We who are fettered in the dark bondages of matter and flutter our wings, as it were, in our endeavours to rise from the material Light (which is True Darkness) to that greater Light which is God's Effulgence, but invisible to the material eyes of man (for he could not behold its brightness and live), we are, as students of the Mysteries, endeavouring to find a way to escape from the opposite conditions of God's Splendour — the Earth — although we were sent down here to learn the lessons of the material in order to apply that which we have learned later on in the other cycles of existence elsewhere. 
If we reject the doctrine that all on earth did exist in God's Imagination before He evolved gradually the Kosmos out of its chaotic disorder, and if we say that this is not true, then we are completely wrong in our thinking; for it is highly absurd to think of inert matter, solely moved by blind force, and directed by its own 'intelligence' forming itself spontaneously into a Universe of such harmony as we know it, in spite of its condition of Darkness when compared with the Light of God, and its condition of evil when compared with God's Goodness and Love. For if we take a piece of really inert matter (supposing we could find it on earth) where is its Intelligence and Imagination? And if we take a piece of live matter, which applies to everything on earth, where shall we find in it Intelligence and Imagination such as is exhibited by nearly all organic things, or even the simplest instinct? 
If the Soul and Higher Mind of Man are really the outcome of the Essence of the Universal Soul, or God, and an infinitesimal fragment of 
the first Creative Principle, it must of necessity partake in some deon of all the attributes of the demiurgic power. As the Creator, breaking in the chaotic mass of dead, inactive matter shaped it into Form by means of His Imagination, so man, if he knew his powers, could do the same to a degree. As Pheidias (Athenian sculptor, ca. 490-430 B.C.). gathering together the loose particles of clay and moistening them with water, could give plastic shape to the sublime Idea evoked by his creative and imaginative faculties, so the mother who knows her power can fashion the coming child into whatever form she likes. Ignorant of his power, the sculptor produces only an inanimate though ravishing figure of inert matter; while the mind of the mother, violently affected by her imagination, and ‘seeing beyond' matter, projects into the Astral Light an image of the object which impressed it before as a prototype, and, by repercussion, this is stamped upon the foetus. 
Learn, therefore, the technique of 'seeing beyond' matter by using your imagination (which you can do efficiently only if you know how to relax), for thus you will take the first step to 'projecting' your thoughts and eventually your ‘astral body', into realms far beyond the material. It is very necessary to learn this technique, for when, at the appointed time, you enter into the Realms of the Spirit you will need this faculty of ‘seeing beyond' into the realms of matter — if you wish to justify your existence in those Higher Realms. And you can only justify your existence there if you are able to project your thoughts of Love, Goodness and Guidance to those in the material Realms who are in need of such thoughts. If you cannot do this there is every possible chance that you may be sent back into another Incarnation here — and who wants that? 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
