SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER 
Grade 1. Number 25. 

Dear Disciple, 
When these Lectures were originally written we quoted a newspaper report, published in July 1940, wherein it was stated that a minute quantity of uranium had been isolated by two Scientists in New York, Dr. H.K. Kingdon, and Dr. H.C. Pollock. The amount was one-hundred-millionth of a gram, or one-thirty-billionth of a pound; truly astronomical figures! 
In this article Dr. Kingdon was quoted as having said the isolation was a “step towards the goal of tapping the storehouse of energy known to exist in atomic nuclei”. Here we have one of those misleading state ments which make the layman think that Science has made another great new discovery. Nothing is farther from the truth in this instance. 
Uranium was discovered by Klaproth in 1789!! It is a hard, silver-grey metal, resembling iron; it is capable of taking on a high polish, but it tarnishes readily on exposure to the atmosphere. Finely divided uranium takes fire on exposure to air, and the compact metal slowly decomposes water at ordinary temperatures and rapidly at 100°C. 
Although this incident is now well out of date we have nevertheless retained this example in order to put you on your guard, and we hope it will prevent you from believing sensational newspaper and television reports too readily. Such pronouncements keep cropping up in one form or another, and we felt a word of caution would not be amiss. Always refer to your Lectures to see what they say, for the statements found there are always true. 
It is the same with Darwin's theory on natural selection and the 'descent'?) of man from the apes. If man really sprang from the monkeys it would be an 'ascent'!! Darwin's theories were antedated by the theories of certain ancient and medieval occultists who largely extended the chain at both ends! Moreover, these Philosophers were explorers as daring in psychology as in anthropology. They never turned aside from the double parallel-path traced for them by their great Master Hermes. “As above, so below”, was ever their axiom; and their physical evolution was traced out simultaneously with the spiritual one; as it should be, for both are One. On one point, at least, our modern biologists are quite consistent: unable, as yet, to demonstrate the existence of a distinct individual soul in animals, they deny it in man. 
Reason has brought them to the brink of Tyndall's "impassable chasm” between mind and matter; instinct alone can teach how to bridge it. When in their despair of ever being able to fathom the mystery of life they will have to come to a dead stop, their instinct may re-assert itself, and take them across the hitherto fathomless abyss. Let them push on boldly until they discover that it is not spirit that dwells in matter, but matter which clings to spirit; and that the latter alone is an eternal, imperishable abode for all things visible and invisible!! 
Although matter and spirit are One, and both are eternal — which is true in both instances — we must explain the seeming contradiction in the previous sentence. 
Matter is eternal, but subject to definite cycles of life and death or wakefulness and activity, and sleep. We may consider it from either viewpoint, and both will be correct. Spirit, however, is always in a state of vibrant life in the Seven Higher Realms, of which the earth is the lowest part, and the centre of all the Realms, above and below. 
Matter is inert, asleep or dead, even the atoms, until God breathes His Spirit into it. Matter clings to this Spirit desperately, for its lower instincts — the lower mind — know that without the Spirit of God it must die, dissolve, go to sleep, or become inactive again. This is one of the reasons that all living beings and things are afraid to die. They are to some extent influenced by their lower minds, and the Higher Mind, the negative part of the positive Soul, has not yet learned to be sufficiently independent to be free from the dominion of the body, or lower mind, at any rate it is not yet completely free from its influence. And we say here that there are extremely few persons in the world who do not feel that influence in some way, and this is but natural. It is that independence, that fearless strength of the Spirit of the Higher Mind which we must seek to acquire. It is one of the lessons we have come into human incarnation for. The man who fears not death is called a hero. This is a very good appellation, for the truly spiritual man is full of heroism, and fears nothing. He is of the stuff of which martyrs are made. Such ‘martyrs' have found freedom; they know by instinct, reason or Wisdom, that Spirit is Life in Light, and all the rest illusion and death. They are not afraid to leave the material world of illusion behind; the only attribute of theirs that does feel fear is their body. 
So Spirit is life in the true Light; the Material is darkness in death. Spirit is Purity (in the realms above the Earth and beyond earthly or material vibrations), and Matter is impurity, for it is given to corruption when the spirit escapes from its tenacious grip. Therefore Spirit is God, and Good, and Matter is the reverse of God, and evil. They are the reverse sides of one another. Spirit is Light. Matter is Darkness. Spirit and Matter are one only because they are the opposite and completion of each other. Which would a pure man choose in his Wisdom, when he has found the Truth? 
The esoteric Philosophers held that everything in Nature is but a materialisation of the Spirit. The Eternal First Cause is latent Spirit they said, and matter from the beginning. “In the beginning was the Word... and the Word was God.” 
While conceding the idea of such a God to be an unthinkable abstraction to human reason, they claimed that the unerring human instinct grasped it as a reminiscence of something concrete to it, though intangible to our physical selves. With the first Idea, which emanated from the double-sexed and hitherto inactive Deity (the Father-Mother God), the first motion was communicated to the whole Universe (by which they should have meant the Kosmos in our own case of Sun and Planets, etc.), and the electric thrill was felt instantaneously throughout boundless Space (here again they should have said the boundless — almost – Space of our Kosmos). Spirit begat Force and Force Matter; and thus the latent (?) Deity manifested itself as a Creative Energy. All the above is open to further discussion in the Higher Grades. 
When did all this take place and at what point of eternity, or how? That question must always remain unanswered, for human reason is unable to grasp the great mystery. But though spirit-matter was from all eternity, as it existed in a latent state, the evolution of our visible Universe must have had a beginning. To our feeble intellect, this beginning may seem so remote as to appear to us eternity itself — a period inexpressible in figures or language. Yet, as we have told you before, there were great Adepts in Atlantis who have worked out the cycles of sleep and awakening to which our Kosmos, and, in a larger sense our Universe, are subjected. We will give you these cycles at a later stage of our work. They are not secret; but they do not fit into this section of our studies. 
The mystery of first creation was ever the despair of Science, to which it is unfathomable, unless we accept the doctrine of the Hermeticists. Though Matter is co-eternal with Spirit in a higher sense, that matter is certainly not our visible, tangible and discernible matter, but its extreme sublimation in one of the Higher Realms (the Fourth — in fact — if we count the earth as the first and lowest in an ascending scale). The next realm of spirit-matter is but one remove higher than the matter as we know it on Earth; but it is still spirit-matter. After bodily death the Higher Mind of man may dwell in that next realm; or. if he is fairly advanced in spirituality and wisdom, he may proceed to the one above; two removes from the earth realm; but he is still in the domain of spirit-matter and must return to earth to be born again as a human being. Only when he is sufficiently evolved to gain entrance into the Fourth Realm can he choose whether he shall return to earth for the purpose of some special service or not. But even in the Fourth Divine and imperishable Abode he is still immersed in spirit-matter, though extremely etherealised, and he still has a body, and he dwells in material-spiritual surroundings, although in that realm there is no longer death or decay, and matter has been entirely sanctified by the Sublime Spirit, and only the completely sublimated Higher Mind of Man can reach it and be joined to the Immortal Soul. Soul and Mind then becoming a balanced entity of the negative and positive completion. 
But this is not all, for there is a further blending possible in that Divine Region, which will be discussed in the Highest Teachings of our Order. It is extremely difficult to discuss the actual conditions in such a Realm by means of material similitudes of earthly thinking and reasoning. We ask you therefore, to dwell upon that which we have just told you, and imagine the utter splendour of such a region of spirit-matter. Some of you will find it easy; especially such as have been privileged to see clairvoyantly some of the sublime messengers who come at times to the earthly realms in order to bring comfort and inspiration to such of us who have learned to attune with them. But if we have such clairvoyant powers or gifts we must always remember that it is an enormous sacrifice for those pure Beings to descend through the denser and denser regions below their own in order to reach the earth; and it is done only when they greatly love one of their own kindred, who is still imprisoned here at the lower end of the scale of the vibrations of the Seven Higher Realms, or when they come on an errand of mercy. It is just as difficult for them to descend to us as it is difficult for a diver to descend very low into the ocean. In each case the pressure is so great that it almost suffocates them. 
Now if you should require more than our mere word for the above statements (and this would be an eminently correct attitude of mind, for we do not want you to accept everything we tell you on blind faith), we will now refer you to one of the excluded Books of the New Testament; though why it was ever excluded only the old Fathers of the Christian Church knew in their gross ignorance of Holy Truth! (see note at end). 
In the 'Revelation of Peter' we can read: 
"And the Lord added and said: Let us go into the mountain (and). pray. And going with Him, we twelve disciples besought Him that he would show us one of our righteous brethren that had departed out of the world, that we might see what manner of men they are in their form, and take courage, and encourage also the men that should hear us. And as we prayed suddenly there appeared two men standing before the Lord upon whom we were not able to look. For there issued from their countenance a ray as of the sun, and their raiment was shining so as the eye of man never saw the like: for no mouth is able to declare nor heart to conceive the glory wherewith they were clad and the beauty of their countenance. Whom when we saw we were astonished for their bodies were whiter than any snow and redder than any rose. And the redness of them was mingled with the whiteness and, in a word, I am not able to declare their beauty. For their hair was curling and flourishing (flowery) and fell comely about their countenance and their shoulders like a garland woven of nard and various flowers, or like a rainbow in the air: such was their comeliness. 
"We, then, seeing the beauty of them were astonished at them, for they appeared suddenly. And I drew near to the Lord and said: Who are these? He said to me: These are your righteous brethren whose appearance ye did desire to see. And I said unto Him: And where are all the righteous? Or of what sort is the world wherein they are, and possess this glory? And the Lord showed me a very great region outside this world exceedingly bright with Light, and the air of that place illuminated with the beams of the sun, and the earth of itself flowering with blossoms that fade not, and full of spices and plants, fair-flowering and incorruptible, and bearing blessed fruit. And so great was the blossom that the odour thereof was borne thence even unto us. And the dwellers in that place were clad with the raiment of shining angels, and their raiment was like unto their land (in beauty and splendour).” 

May we all meet in that Holy Realm. 
Your Hidden Master. 
*NOTE: The Revelation of Peter was known to many of the early Fathers of the Church and is mentioned in the Muratorian Canon written about 180 A.D, which states: “We also accept a Revelation by John and one by Peter, although some of us do not want the latter to be read aloud in the Church." Those of our good Students who wish to delve more deeply into this excluded literature will find The Revelation of Peter in The Apocryphal New Testament by M.R. James, pub. the Clarendon Press, Oxford 1924. 
