SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER 
Grade 1. Number 23. 

Dear Disciple, 
Today we will give you a few more details about “Extension of Consciousness”. The great fact about a man's inner development is the vision he has about the Spiritual Universe. The great Philosophers may theorise about this and that, but all of them can only give expression to that which they behold with the eye of the Spirit. We all have our own place in the Universe of Spirit; and although that place changes from ugliness to beauty and thence to Sublimity as we evolve in our spiritual growth and understanding, it is still our own place. 
We can only share that place in the full sense of the word with the one being (be it man or woman) who is our counterpart in every way. There is a male or a female completion of ourselves somewhere in the Universe, for in the beginning male and female were combined in one person. When the great separation was decided upon by the Creators these male and female principles were distributed all over the world in their next incarnation, and in the constant interchanges of new personalities — so far as new bodies were concerned – there came about a colossal mix-up, and it happens but seldom that the twain who were once united may meet again in the flesh. 
That this is so, is proved by the many unhappy marriages we hear so much about. Neither of the partners in these cases have met their true mate. There is a constant search going on for this true mate; and it leads to all sorts of unpleasant complications. There are very good reasons for all this, and one of these reasons is, that it is necessary for the Higher Mind to have all sorts of experience, and mix with all sorts of personalities, which will teach it invaluable lessons during the cycles of its evolution; and one of them is patience. The search for the true mate however, is a fairly hopeless one, for not until the Higher Powers decide that the time is ripe and both halves have earned the happiness which is a foretaste of Paradise, shall the two halves be united. Such cases have been known, but they are very rare. To become entangled in the Eternal Triangle, during this search for the true mate, is to give way to a temptation which must be resisted. It can never lead to true happiness, and if we are placed in a connubial position which does not bring us that happiness for which we hoped, we must carry out our obligations in order to earn greater happiness with the real mate later on. 
But do not call such a mate a 'Soul Mate', for there is no such being while we are in the flesh. Why this is so you will learn in due course. We can only hope to meet the original companion who shared body and mind with us when man was first created as a dual sexual personality. Please realise that this is but the first introduction to this very important subject; it will be developed later into a most complicated law, which has never before been revealed. 
The Roman Catholic Church is right when it refuses to acknowledge divorce. It may have lost the reason for this veto, or 10 may not; we do not know and it does not matter very much. But the principle is right; for God hath joined a man and a woman together for a definite purpose in every instance, no matter how strange this may seem to be at times. 
Whatever your condition of married life is — if you are married or in a partnership with a member of the opposite sex — SEE IT THROUGH; and the reward will come later if you trust in your wise Creators, or the Lords of Destiny. This does not mean that you should accept mental, emotional or physical abuse from a spouse or partner. We do not advocate martyrdom to our Students, and it is foolhardy to continue any relationship when violence and deliberate cruelty of any kind is involved; this must be evident to all. What we do mean is that all too many people nowadays are ready to give up on a relationship when the glamour wears off and they are faced with difficulties of one sort or another, or meet a more ‘promising' partner. Make the best of your present conditions, and your future conditions – whether on Earth or in the Cosmic or Heavenly realms — will be enhanced a thousandfold. This is not a personal theory but a LAW!! 
If your partner is not he or she you thought at first, and you feel unhappy or lonely because the two of you cannot think along the same lines, or your minds do not blend, think of Thoreau's exclamation when he said: “Lonely, why should I feel lonely? Is not our planet in the Milky Way?” 
There is much wisdom in this. We are never lonely if we but attune to the beauties which are spread all around us in the Universe of Matter and Spirit. Go within yourself, if the beauties of Nature are not enough or not available, and commune for awhile with that Divine Principle called the Soul, which will always answer the appeal from your Higher Mind when you stand in need of good counsel and loving compassion. There lies the way of escape for you, if you feel that you want to be free from your everyday surroundings for a little while. Listen to the music of your Soul, dream for a while of its sweetness, purity and holiness, and forget the world and its problems; build yourself a City of Delight, or an Empire's Glory and crown yourself with the Jewel of Bliss. It is all within you, and a few moments in silence with your dreams will result in your emergence from them as a man reborn with new strength to face your problems with an courage. Novalis said: “In the spiritual Nature-Kingdom, mas nuo everywhere seek his peculiar territory and climate, his best occupacions his particular neighbourhood, in order to cultivate a paradise this is the right system...paradise is scattered over the word Universe...”(and in Man's own Higher Mind and Soul!) 
William James, in 'A Pluralistic Universe' says: "For my own par I find in some of these abnormal or supernormal facts the strongest suggestions in favour of a superior consciousness being possible. That particular part of his sentence is correct; but he does not say, or know that this superior consciousness is the very Soul of man itself, and that it is always in direct communication with the Higher Mind, if the latter will but tune into it and listen! The Soul is a mode of being which transcends mere human intelligence or will...for it dwells in WISDOM. 
Fechner, in his 'Little book about life after death', says: “It may happen that the earthly body falls asleep in one direction deeply enough to allow it in others to awaken far beyond its usual limits, and yet not so deeply and completely as to awaken (to ordinary earth-life) no more. Or, to the subjective vision there comes a flash so unusually vivid as to bring to the earthly sense an impression rising above the threshold from an otherwise inaccessible distance. Here begin the wonders of clairvoyance, of presentiments, and premonitions in dreams — pure fables, if the future body and the future life are fables; otherwise signs of the one and predictions of the other; but what has signs exists, and what has prophecies will come". Eminently correct, of course, for know that such visions are not fables, but extensions of the consciousness of the Higher Mind, wrongly termed astral projections' as a rule. 
We are never alone! Has not Josiah Royce said that “Privacy is ignorance?” And this is true. “Unknown and mysterious relations of our bodies allow us to surmise unknown and mysterious relations with Nature, and therefore Nature is that wondrous fellowship into which our bodies introduce us, and which we learn through the mode of its constitutions and abilities”. The writer of this sentence confirms what we have just stated, although he uses his own terminology; but in substance we agree. If you can but realise this eternal sweet companionship of the true Material principle which is in yourself - The Higher Mind — with the Soul, you are liberated in the same manner as a poet is liberated when his mind goes soaring in ecstasy to the beautiful worlds of his imagination. You will become one of "Those who are free throughout the World”; which was the title of the Order of the Ancient British Bards. Emerson once said that, "Nothing is of any value in books, excepting the transcendental and extraordinary”. If you follow our Teachings carefully you will become aware of the transcendental in them, and the ‘ordinary' will lose its hold on you, for you will be able to control it; in other words you will be at PEACE within, for a man who is FREE, has the Power of PEACE, although it will be his own SECRET! The illusion of SELF will fade, and with it all the tribulations to which this self is a slave on earth; and the great Cosmic LIFE commences then, while we are still embedded in the gross Matter of the flesh and our material surroundings. 
“From every gulf the tides of Being roll, From every zenith burns the indwelling day; And life in Life has drowned thee, and soul in Soul; And these are God, and thou thyself art they." as F.W. Myers has said so beautifully and truly. 
When you enter that intimate and glorious life in the Cosmic Realms, and it pervades your Higher Mind with all the plenitude of Bliss Divine, your innermost being is stirred with tumultuous JOY, and LOVE is diffused within you like some powerful and all-dissolving Blessing. The shackles are broken, and you stand FREE on the mountaintop of God's Effulgence. Before, and all around you are spread the wonder-climes of Paradisiacal Beauty, wrapped in the Golden Hues of Eternal and thrilling LIFE. And once you have succeeded in penetrating there, the portals are for ever ajar and need but a slight push to give you entrance whenever the troubles of life become too hard to bear. Ye will be as a Child of Splendour and Flame, risen in full magnificence from out of the dust of the abject and lower spheres of Earth. When our minds are absorbed in the contemplation of Beauty we really live, and if we cannot find the beauty we crave for on earth we must seek it elsewhere. It is ready waiting for you at your first real call. Take, then, the way of escape, for the road lies straight before you and you have only to knock sincerely at the gate for it to open and let you through. This is the way to find your own place. 
You need no elaborate rites or ceremonials to find this roadway. All you need is a trusting heart and a pure, undoubting mind.... and forgetfulness of the chains which bind you yet to earth and all its blind errors. This is EXTENSION of CONSCIOUSNESS. 
May you find THE WAY. 
Your Hidden Master. 
