SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER 
Grade 1. Number 27. 

Dear Disciple, 
Goethe has said that: “All beginnings are easy, it is the ulterior steps that are of most difficult ascent and most rarely taken.” This applies especially to our studies; it is only the gifted and persistent student who will ever reach those parts of our work in which the great Arcana are fully revealed. We do not say this in any slighting manner so far as the early work of our Members is concerned; for though it is easy when compared with the future studies and exercises, it has its difficulties as you all know. For this reason it would be very unwise to try to rush you along by giving you all sorts of new exercises, or to even develop the ones you have been working on up to now. We are glad to state that the work of our students and their progress has been uniformly good, although each individual has progressed in a different direction. It is for this reason that we ask you so many times for reports; and to all those who respond to our requests we give personal instructions, when needed, in our separate letters, as you know We cannot judge of a student's work when such reports are not sent in, and in spite of the work entailed by the study of each student's problems, we reply gladly to them all, as many of you are aware of at various times. 
There are, of course, several of our Members who do not need to ask us many questions in the beginning, and by saying this we have in mind those whose Occult knowledge, great spiritual status, or scientific achievements, or other qualities of different sorts make reports super fluous at first. But even for them the time may come when they will need enlightenment on certain subjects, and we wish to say now that we are always at their service. “Great results cannot be achieved at once; and we must be satisfied to advance in life as we walk, step by step", as Samuel Smiles has it. So it is with us; and as you advance along the Path of Truth - step by step — so you may be sure that your Masters are always with you; keeping you company and responding to your trust in them with affection and love. 
We now commence the study of a very great subject indeed; it is the study of the intermediate stages from one incarnation to another - the Path of the Moon as it is called in Occult terminology - and the Path of the Sun, which latter is that path the Soul and Mind and Astral Body tread when they have done with the Illusions of the Earth and the two realms above it in vibration, and need return to the lowest plane of the seven highest - the Earth - no more, if they do not wish it. 
First we must take the path of the Moon; for in all probability that is the Path most of us have trodden in the past. Those who know the Sun-path and are here by choice are very few in comparison with the multitudes of men, and they are those whose work as great Writers, Poets, Sculptors, Artists, Musicians, Leaders of Mankind, help to raise their brothers up in different ways, great and enlightened Scientists, and many others; known or unknown to the rest of mankind. 
Of these latter ones of the Sun there are always some 30,000 incarnated, doing the work of the Sons of God by shedding the light of beauty, wisdom and goodness upon the dark realms of the material worlds. They are not necessarily famous or rich; their work may lie in places of which the average “intellectual' has no conception. On the other hand they may be of world renown; and we could name a great number of them if we wished. You can find them in the pulpit, in the slums, or sometimes even at the Universities! In fact, they are everywhere, and where you would least expect them. And they may, at times, be unaware of their high descent. 
Before we tell you all about the Path of the Moon it is necessary to consider that luminary in some detail and see it with the eyes of the Philosopher, or the so-called pagan or heathen, and in other ways; and to learn a little from them all — for there is Truth in everything - even in Untruth!! 

It is known to Science as well as to the profane that the Moon-beams can have, at times, a most pernicious influence; but Eastern Occultism has more real information about the genuine character of our treacherous satellite than all the Western astronomers and scientists put together, in spite of their expeditions to the Moon, enormous telescopes, and other means of measuring, weighing and dissecting fair Diana; she who in“clouded majesty unveils her peerless light and o'er the dark her silver mantle throws." 
The Moon has a bad effect upon the mental and bodily constitution of men in many ways. In the old sailing days, and even today, no exper ienced Captain will allow his men to sleep on deck during a full moon. 
And it has been proved by a long series of experiments that no person can sit, lie or sleep for any length of time, even if he has the strongest nerves, in a room lit up by the moon without injury to his health. Even provisions of every kind will decay and be spoiled more rapidly in moonlight than they would in total darkness. This is not due to the long exploded theory that all the refrangible and reflected rays will act injuriously. There is an old chronicle in which you may read for instance that in the year 1693, on January 21st during the eclipse of the moon, thrice as many sick people died on that day than on the preceding and following days. And Francis Bacon used to fall down senseless at the beginning of every lunar eclipse and did not recover consciousness until it had passed. Charles VIth in 1399, became a lunatic at every new moon and at the beginning of the full moon. 
Epilepsy and neuralgia become violent with certain phases of the moon; and the cure for them, as well as for several other nervous disorders, is the light of the Sun. 
Animals, plants and metals, especially silver and its derivatives, are all influenced by the rays of the moon, owing to some mysterious and nefast connection between them and the luminary of the night. But Science cannot tell you the reason for all these phenomena! All that the physicians and physiologists have ever heard of (with few exceptions) is that there was in Ancient Greece a widely spread belief that the magicians, sorcerers and enchanters of Thessaly could draw down the Moon by the simple force of their incantations, thus producing eclipses! 
Isis of Egypt and Diana of Greece were identical; wearing on their heads the crescent or the horns of the cow; the latter being the symbol of the new Moon. 
Many profound mysteries of nature are securely shrouded by the veils of Isis and Diana, who are both anthropomorphized symbols of nature; Goddesses; whose priests were the mightiest adepts of the lands where the two were worshipped. 
There is more than a suggestion to the student of the Occult in the fact that at the Temple of Diana in Aricia the officiating priest had always to murder his predecessor; for it shows him that in the temples of Diana — the greatest and most reverenced of all the Goddesses of Greece and Rome — from that of Ephesus (one of the seven wonders of the world) down to that of Aricia, the same mysterious initiations took place as in the sacred Temples of the Egyptian Isis: i.e. the Initiator having unveiled the Goddess, or shown the neophyte the naked truth, had to die. But this ‘murder' and this 'death' had another meaning too, for they were symbolical in different ways and not actual when the Cult was pure; the same in nature as the 'death' and 'resurrection of the neophyte in the Egyptian ritual of initiation, about which we shall speak in detail later on. 
The Moon was to the Greeks also the all-illuminating virgin Artemis, whose oldest name was Diktynna, the emitted ray, from the word Dikein; and the Sun, Jupiter's image, emitted his golden rays in her to personify that emanation. 
The Moon being non-luminous, shining only by the reflected light of the Sun, accounts for the imagery of Jupiter's daughter, the Goddess of the Moon, whose names are Luna, Astarte or Diana. In the form of the Cretan Diktynna she wears a wreath made of the magic plant Diktamnon, or Dictamnus, the evergreen shrub whose contact is said to develop somnambulism, and to cure it in the end. This plant (Dictamnus albus) is known variously as the 'Burning-bush', 'False Dittany', 'White Dittany', and 'Gas-plant'. 
As Eilithyia and Juno Pronuba she is the Goddess who presides over births; she is an Aesculapian deity, and the use of the dictamnus-wreath, in association with the Moon, shows the profound powers of observation of the Ancients. This plant is known in botany as possessing strongly sedative properties; it grows on Mount Dicte, a Cretan mountain, in great abundance. 
On the other hand the Moon, according to the best authorities on animal magnetism, acts upon the juices and ganglionic system, or nerve cells, the seat from whence proceed all the nerve fibres which play such a prominent part in hypnotism. 
During childbirth the Cretan women were covered with this plant, and its roots were administered as best calculated to soothe acute pain, and allay the irritability so dangerous at this period. They were placed, moreover, within the precincts of the Temple sacred to the goddess, and, if possible, under the direct rays of the resplendent daughter of Jupiter — the bright and warm Eastern Moon. 
Next week our theme will be developed. 

With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
