SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 29. 

Dear Disciple, 
The Ophite seven planetary genii, who emanated one from the other, are found again in the Nazarene religion under the name of the seven 'Imposter daemons', or stellars, who "will deceive all the Sons of Adam”. These are Sol; Spiritus Venerous (Holy Spirit, in her material aspect), the Mother of the "seven badly disposed stellars”, answering to the Gnostic Achamoth; Nebu, or Mercury, "a false Messiah who will deprave the ancient worship of God”; Sin (or Luna, or Shuril); Kiun, (or Saturn or Kivan); Bel-Jupiter; and the seventh Nerig (Mars), according to the Codex Nazaraeus. 
The Christos of the Gnostics is the chief of the seven Aeons, St. John's seven spirits of God; the Nazarenes have also their seven genii or good aeons, whose chief is Rex Lucis, Mano, their Christos. The Sapta Rishis, the seven Sages of India, inhabit the Sapta-Poura, or the seven celestial cities, represented by the seven stars in the constellation of the Great Bear. 
Please remember these seven Lords, Sages, Stars, Realms and Planes for they will be explained later. 
The Pythagoreans called the number seven the vehicle of life, “as it contained body and soul”. But there is a much higher and grandioser meaning to the number seven, as you will see in due course. So was the ineffable Word considered the seventh and highest of all, for there are six minor substitutes, each belonging to a degree of initiation. And when Moses instituted the Yom Shaba, or Shebang (Shabbath), the allegory of the Lord God resting on the seventh day was but a cloak, or, as the Zohar expresses it, a screen to hide the true meaning. 
Babylonia happened to be situated on the way of the great stream of the earliest Hindu emigration, and the Babylonians were one of the first peoples benefited thereby. These Khaldi were the worshippers of the Moon-God, Deus Lunus, from which fact we may infer that the Akkadians — if such must be their name — belonged to the race of the Kings of the Moon, whom tradition shows as having reigned in Pruyay, now Allahabad. With them the trinity of Deus Lunus was manifested in the three lunar phases, completing the quaternary with the fourth, and typifying the death of the Moon-God in its gradual waning and final disappearance. This death was allegorised by them and attributed to the triumph of the genius of evil over the light-giving Deity. In the same manner the later nations allegorised the death of the Sun-Gods, Apollo and Osiris, at the hands of Typhon and the great dragon, Python, when the Sun entered the winter solstice. Babel, Arach and Alkad are the names of the Sun. The Zoroastrian Oracles are full and explicit upon the subject of the Divine Triad, and the Rev. Dr. Maurice has said: “A triad of Deity shines forth throughout the whole world, of which a Monad is the head”. 
But the destruction of the God of Light by the evil forces, as it was taught by the Khaldi in Babylon, has another meaning as well, closely connected with the Path of the Moon, the destruction of life by death, and the subsequent rebirth in a new body; just as the allegory showed it in the case of the Moon-God. 
The Zodiac is clearly mentioned in 2 Kings, 23:5. And before the "Book of the Law” was “found” by Hilkiah, the high priest, the signs of the Zodiac were known and worshipped. These were held in the same adoration as the Sun and the Moon, since the "priests, whom the Kings of Judah had ordered to burn incense — unto Baal, to the Sun, and the Moon, and to the planets, and to all the host of heaven”, or to the “twelve signs or constellations”, as the marginal note in the English Bible explains, had followed the injunction for centuries. They were stopped in their idolatry only by King Joshua in 624 B.C. 
The Old Testament is full of allusions to the twelve Zodiacal Signs, and in the dream of Joseph, who saw eleven “stars” bowing to the twelfth, which was his "star", there is a direct reference to the Zodiac. And the Roman Catholics have discovered in it a prophecy of Christ, who is the twelfth star they say, and the others the eleven Apostles: the absence of the twelfth being regarded as a prophetic allusion to the treachery of Judas. 
From the position of the Sun and Moon, and their number of revolutions (20.400 and 272.724 respectively) the Hindu Sages ascertained the commencement of one of their great epochs in the history of the Earth; the Kali Yuga Age, which we shall study in subsequent lectures. 
In their religious rites the Moon served a dual purpose. Personified as a female Goddess for exoteric purposes, or as a male God in allegory and symbol, in Occult Philosophy the satellite was regarded as a sexless Potency to be well studied, because it was to be dreaded. 
With the initiated Aryans, Chaldeans, Greeks and Romans, Soma, Sri, Artemis Soteira (the hermaphrodite Apollo, whose attribute is the lyre, and the bearded Diana of the bow and arrow), Deus Lunus, and especially Osiris-Lunus and Thoth-Lunus (who is the Buddha-Soma of India, or Mercury and Moon), were the Occult potencies of the Moon. But whether male or female, Thoth or Minerva, Soma or Astoreth, the Moon is the Occult Mystery of mysteries, and more of a symbol of evil than of good. That the Moon was not always reverenced is shown in the Mysteries, in which the death of the Moon-God (mentioned above) was allegorised by the Moon standing for the Genius of Evil, that, for the time, triumphs over the Light and Life-giving God, the Sun. 
In the very early history of the Earth, when men were still in the form of Hermaphrodites, the male Moon was worshipped, and, when the sexes became separated — the so-called FALL – Deus Lunus became sacred as an androgyne, male and female in turn; and finally it served for purposes of sorcery, as a dual power with the later Atlanteans. 
After the disappearance of Atlantis the Lunar-Solar worship divided the nations into two antagonistic camps. It led to events described aeons later in the Mahābharātan War, which to the Europeans is a fable, and to the Hindus and Occultists the historical strife between the Suryāvānshas and the Indovānshas. Originating in the dual aspect of the Moon, the worship of the male and female principles respectively, it ended in distinct Solar and Lunar Cults. Among the Semitic races the Sun was for a very long time feminine and the Moon masculine; the latter notion being adopted by them from the Atlantean traditions. The Moon was called “The Lord of the Sun”, Bel-Shemesh, before Shemesh worship. The ignorance of the incipient reasons for such a distinction, and the ignorance of Occult Principles, led the nations into anthropomorphic idol-worship. 
During that period which is absent from the Mosaic Books, viz., from the exile from Eden to the allegorical Flood, the Jews, with the rest of the Semites, worshipped Dayanisi, the “Ruler of Men”, the "Judge”, or the Sun. 
Though the Jewish Canon and Christianism have made the Sun to become the "Lord God" and "Jehovah” in the Bible, yet the same Bible is full of indiscreet traces of the androgyne Deity, which was Jehovah, the Sun, and Astoreth, the Moon, in its female aspect, and quite free from the present metaphorical element given to it. 
God is a "consuming fire”, appears in, and "is compassed by fire”. It was not only in vision that Ezekiel saw the Jews "worshipping the Sun". The Baal of the Israelites - the Shemesh of the Moabites and the Moloch of the Ammonites — was the identical “Sun-Jehovah”, and he is till now the “King of the Hosts of Heaven”, the Sun, as much as Astoreth was the “Queen of Heaven”, or the Moon. The “Sun of Righteousness” has only now become a metaphorical expression. But the religion of every Ancient Nation has been based primarily upon the Occult manifestations of a purely abstract Force or Principle, now called “God”. The very establishment of such worship shows, in its details and rites, that the Philosophers who evolved such systems of Nature, subjective and objective, possessed profound knowledge and were acquainted with many facts of a scientific nature. For besides being purely Occult, the rites of Lunar worship were based upon a knowledge of physiology – quite a modern science with us - psychology, sacred mathematics, geometry and metrology in their right application to symbols and figures, which are but glyphs recording observed natural and scientific facts; in short, upon a most minute and profound knowledge of Nature. 
Lunar magnetism generates life, preserves it, and destroys it; and Soma embodies the triple power of Trimurti, the Sanskrit term for "assuming three aspects”, and the Hindu Triad Brahmā, Vishnu and Shiva. 
May the Light maintain and sustain you, 
Your Hidden Master. 
