SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 20. 

Dear Disciple, 
We trust that the deep philosophical commentary of Proclus on magic has given you an opportunity to use your philosophical powers of thinking and meditating on such elevated subjects. 
After Proclus has made the statement you have been studying he proceeds to point out certain mysterious peculiarities of plants, minerals and animals, all of which are well known to our naturalists, but none of which are explained. There are, for instance, such peculiar phenomena as the rotary motion of the sunflower, the heliotrope and the lotus which, before the rising of the Sun, folds its leaves, drawing the petals within itself, so to say, and then expands them gradually as the sun rises, and draws them in again as it seems to descend to the West; and the behaviour of the sun and lunar stones and the helioselenus; of the cock and the lion, and other animals. 
“Now the Ancients” says Proclus, “having contemplated these mutual sympathies of things (celestial and terrestrial), applied them for Occult purposes, both to celestial and terrene natures, by means of which, through a certain similitude, they deduced divine natures; terrestrial natures receiving the plenitude of such as are celestial, but celestial (receiving the plenitude of) super-celestial essences, while every order of things proceeds gradually in a beautiful descent from the highest to the lowest." (This is, of course, the exact opposite of the modern theory of evolution — and, moreover, it is correct, as you will see in due course; although it is not complete). “For”, he continues, “whatever particulars are collected into one above the order of things, are afterwards dilated in descending, various souls being distributed under their various ruling divinities." 
In the above explanation Proclus does not advocate a simple superstition, but one part of the Laws adopted, tested scientifically and fully approved by Occult Science; for notwithstanding its Occult nature, and therefore unknown to our Scholars, who deny its possibilities, Magic is still a Science in the hands of an expert. It is firmly and solidly based on the mysterious affinities existing between organic and (so-called) inorganic bodies, the visible productions of the Four Kingdoms and the invisible power of the Universe under God. 
That which Science calls gravitation, the Ancients and the Mediaeval Hermetists called magnetism, attraction, affinity. It is the Universal Law, which was understood by Plato and explained in the Timæus as the attraction of lesser bodies to larger ones, and of similar bodies to similar, the latter exhibiting a magnetic power rather than following the “law” of gravitation. As above, so below; the Laws of magnetism and attraction apply to spiritual conditions as well as to the material. We can go further still and state definitely that it is always a spiritual attraction or magnetism that causes affinities to rush together whilst embedded or clothed with the material. Repulsion is due to the same cause — reversed. This applies to animate as well as to inorganic nature (which is also animated, but in a more or less latent state). 
The anti-Aristotelean formula that gravitation causes all bodies to descend with equal rapidity, without reference to their weight, the difference being caused by some unknown agency, which ignores weight, points a great deal more forcibly to magnetism than to gravitation; the former attracting rather in virtue of the substance than the weight. 
A thorough familiarity with the occult faculties of everything existing in nature, visible as well as invisible; their mutual relations, attractions and repulsions; the cause of these, traced to the Spiritual Principle which pervades and animates all things; the ability to furnish the best conditions for this principle to manifest itself; in other words profound and exhaustive knowledge of natural law — this was and is the basis of true magic. 
Now we return to our study of the atom. The linking up of atoms to form molecules can be very complicated indeed, but we will mention only one kind of molecule, which is so large that we can see and handle it. That is the diamond, which is a single giant molecule. Instead of the few thousand atoms that can make up an elaborate organic molecule, we have in a large diamond something like a quadrillion atoms! A diamond is a crystal of almost pure carbon. It is the same element that is found in an impure form in coal and charcoal. The extreme difference between charcoal and a diamond is due to the arrangement and linkages of the atoms. 
Every atom of carbon has four outer electrons, so that it is capable of joining up with four others. The carbon atom is often described as Tetrahedral, because the links are directed towards the corners of a tetrahedron, or triangular pyramid. We have to think of each carbon atom at the centre of a tetrahedron. Each of these four atoms is in turn linked to four others arranged in the same way, and so on. 
You know probably that in the scale of hardness the diamond is in a class by itself, far above the next hardest substance. The system of chemical links which tie each atom in a diamond firmly to four other atoms, explains why the diamond is so hard. In most substances the material is held together by attractions between the molecules. In dividing the substance we are merely separating molecule from molecule. But in trying to cut a diamond we are trying to cut through the chemical links, which are far more powerful than the attractions between the molecules. To cut through chalk in the same way that we might attempt to cut a diamond we should have to divide the molecules into their constituent atoms: calcium, carbon and oxygen; actually there is nothing but chalk on each side of a cut. 
We knew of one Author who, in a manuscript on the Great Occult Laws, used the diamond as a symbol for God. This is very apt; for, as the atoms of a diamond are always arranged in groups of five, and five is the numerical Symbol for Pure Love, the diamond is a perfect symbol for Love — which is the Supreme Creator's most perfect attribute. But as the diamond in spite of its wonderful construction is only a material symbol of God's Love, a material substance that can be cut in various ways, so that its groups of atoms become separated, the true Love that comes from God to Man and all other of God's Creations, can never be separated or destroyed; no matter what material means are used by material beings or conditions to bring about such a separation. That Love is eternal and will manifest wherever and whenever there are beings who respond to it in any way. And even when they do not respond to it outwardly, because they are ignorant of its existence for a time on account of being too deeply enmeshed in the material conditions on earth, or because they have so many duties to fulfil that they seem to have no time to think of the Spiritual at times, or for any other reasons, the Great and Pure Love that comes from God is ready and waiting to blaze forth at the first opportunity in all the glorious hues of a sparkling and scintillating diamond. And then there is nothing in the material which can overcome that splendour, or extinguish its Holy Flames. 
For the Love of God we see the missionary, burning with zeal, going forth to wild and unknown lands to be tortured, slain and glorified for his convictions. For the sake of that same Love we see the martyr go to the stake and sing amidst the burning faggots when giving up his Spirit to its Creator. We may see that Divine Love glorified in many ways if we look around us; and whenever we see evidences of it we shall know it for what it is and bow respectfully in passing along on our own way, from whichever altar it shines forth, for it is something so elevated, pure and effulgent that only the recipient of it can comprehend its Glory. 
We spoke to you just now of a certain manuscript. Since this lecture was originally written it has been published in book form. That book is 'The Golden Star' by J. Michaud Ph.D., (Uma Press, London, 1946). We think so highly of it that we have no hesitation in recommending it to you. In it are contained in the most wonderful manner a number of Great Occult Laws, which have not appeared in this way before. Though the Author was one of our Students, he is now dead and we, therefore, feel free to recommend it (which we could not do previously owing to our Rules which forbid the disclosure of names of Members). We only mention it here because we know of nothing like it in importance and beauty in all our wide experience of Occult literature or teachings published in the ordinary way. Although the book is no longer in print and becoming very scarce, we gladly mention it because we believe our Students will both enjoy and derive benefit from it. 
We must now call a halt in our studies of the atom. It will be re ferred to again at times, and developed further when we reach the higher grades, and then your previous study of it with us will be a great help in understanding the Higher Laws of the Universe under God, the Supreme Deity. 
We have said in our Manifesto – which we still advise you to study from time to time — that we teach the real difference between the entirely opposite Laws of the material and the Spiritual Principles. If you have read and understood our previous lectures you will already have an inkling of this difference. The material laws of the dense earth-plane are but reflections of the spiritual conditions existing on the Higher Octaves of the Celestial Universal Vibrations. The still denser conditions in the lower realms of the material universe are but reflections of the very sinful and grossly material attributes of cruelty, hatred, envy, jealousy, intolerance and other mental errors of the lowly evolved man or woman; no matter what their place is in the social scale. 
The last paragraph is of the utmost importance, and we ask you to study it carefully and reflect well on its inner meaning. We asked you before, for instance, to study the overtones of a note struck on the piano and to try to follow their upward course towards the more ethereal altitudes of sound. We did not advise or ask you — and we never shall - to try to listen in to the undertones, which proceed in an exactly similar manner downwards when a note is struck or sounded; namely: lower octave, fifth below that, fourth below that again and so on according to the following system: 
The harmonic series of Overtones, partials or harmonics — 

The reason why we did not advise you to follow the undertones (which is much more difficult in any case and needs an extra special sense of hearing) must be evident to you. By attuning with these undertones you would attune with the dreadful conditions existing in the lower realms, denser than the earth conditions, and that is the last thing in the world we should advise you to do, for it would be terribly dangerous. For the same reason we advised you not to try the colour experiments just before going to sleep!! 
All is vibration in the Universes of the material and of the Spirit. The Great Cosmic Scale reaches from the lowest depths of misery, and the actual death of the Soul, to the Highest Regions of Bliss and Eternal Life; and we on Earth are at the Centre! Which way shall we proceed? It is up to everybody to choose his own way. God has given each one of us perfect Freedom and Freewill; and responsibility as great as its final reward; whichever way we choose to go! 
Those of us who have a measure of the Light must therefore never hate, judge or condemn those who wander about in the darkness of sin - which is ignorance. We must try to help the brother or sister who has strayed from the Road that leads upwards. And we must take as our Holy Example the actions of the Master Jesus Christ, who moved about with pity amongst publicans and sinners and gave them of His Holy Essence. And we must extend this help in Secret, as we told you before. 
May the Glory of True Pity light up the Secret Chambers of your Inner Self. 
Your Hidden Master. 
