SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 

Grade 1. Number 28. 
Dear Disciple, 
The Hindu Brahmans and Buddhists have a series of complicated laws on the influence of the Sun and Moon, which they recognise (correctly) as the positive and negative, or male and female elements respectively, in spite of the fact that the Moon (Soma) is regarded sometimes as a male personality in Hindu mythology; and when the Hindus want to address the Moon as a female being they appeal to the feminine attributes of its negative part only (all created things or beings having a dual aspect — negative or female, and positive or male – in spite of sex, in whatever form it appears). Thus to them the Sun and Moon represent the opposites of the magnetic polarity. 
All the old authors who write on magnetism say: "The influence of the Moon on women is well known"; and Ennemoser as well as Du Potet confirm the theories of the Hindu seers in every particular. 
The Sapphire, which is sacred to the Moon in every country, receives marked respect from the Buddhists; and this may be found to be based on something more scientifically exact than a mere groundless superstition. They endow it with a sacred magical power which every student of psychological hypnotism will understand immediately, for its polished and deep blue surface produces extraordinary somnambulic 
phenomena.
In these modern times the various properties and influences of the prismatic colours are well known, and in our future Lectures we have some most interesting Occult Laws about all of them to reveal to you. But the blue ray — if produced by a substance of the right chemical composition – is the most electric of all (although there are blue rays used in Light Therapy which produce a cold and calming effect, which again depends upon a different chemical formula; for no two blue rays have the same effect, unless they are projected through the same material or substance), and animal and vegetable growth can be increased to an almost miraculous proportion if the correct form of the blue ray is used for that purpose. So here too modern investigation proves the correctness of the Ancient Laws. 
Orpheus taught his disciples that it was possible to affect a whole audience by means of a lodestone; Pythagoras paid particular attention to the colours and nature of all precious stones; while Appolonius of Tyana told his pupils the secret virtue residing in each, and changed his jewelled rings daily, using a particular stone for every day of the month in accordance with the Laws of judicial astrology. 
The Buddhists, however, assert that the sapphire produces peace of mind, equanimity, and overcomes all evil thoughts in man by establishing a healthy circulation within his body. 
This is interesting from another point of view, for one will seldom meet a person who is really healthy and gives way to irritation, anger and so forth. Such a person is perfectly balanced, and has a positive and happy disposition. But when one becomes 'negative the power to repulse bad or evil ‘influences' is often lacking, and such a one may even become a criminal on account of his inability to control his lower mind, or body. Crime is always caused by the lack of that control, and the reason for crime is ever some physical defect which disarranges a person's mentality so that he can no longer distinguish right from wrong — he is deficient in the proper balance of mind and body and has no Peace or real Power! The Buddhists also say that: “The sapphire will open barred doors and dwellings (for man's spirit); it produces a desire for prayer, and it brings more Peace with it than any other gem. But he who would wear it must lead a pure and holy life" (by attuning with its properties). 
Diana-Luna is the daughter of Zeus by Proserpina, and she represents the Earth in her active labour, and, according to Hesiod, as Diana-Eilythia-Lucina she is Juno's daughter. But Juno, devoured by Kronos or Saturn, and restored back to life by the Oceanid Metis, is also known as the Earth. Saturn, as the evolution of Time, swallowed the Earth in one of the ante-historical cataclysms, and it is only when Metis, (the waters) frees the continent by retreating in her many beds, that Juno is said to be restored to her first shape. The idea is expressed in the 9th and 10th verses of the first chapter of Genesis. In the frequent matrimonial quarrels between Juno and Jupiter, Diana, the Moon, is always represented as turning her back on her Mother, the Earth, and smiling at her father, the Sun, causing eclipses, though she chides him for his numerous frolics. 
For this reason the Thessalian magicians were said to have been obliged, during these eclipses, to draw her attention to the Earth by the power of their spells and incantations, and the Babylonian astrologers and Magi never ceased their spells until they had brought about a reconciliation between the irritated couple, after which Juno “radiantly smiled at the bright goddess (Diana), who, encircling her brow with a crescent, returned to her 'hunting place in the mountains'." 
This fable illustrates the different phases of the Moon. The in habitants of the Earth never see more than one half of their satellite; and the Sun, Moon and Earth constantly change positions with relation to each other. With the new Moon there is always a change of weather, and the wind and storms may well suggest a quarrel between the Sun and Earth when the Sun is concealed by grumbling thunderclouds. With every new Moon her dark side is turned towards us, so that she is invisible; and it is only after a reconciliation between the Sun and Earth that a bright crescent becomes visible nearest to the Sun, and she returns once more to her mountains (the Earth). 
The Moon influences everything on Earth to a lesser or greater degree, for the whole of our planet is subject to tides as well as the ocean under her power. 
There are several of the Mimosae who alternately open and close their petals as the full Moon emerges from or is obscured by the clouds. 
The Hindus of Travancore have a very suggestive proverb which says: “Soft words are better than harsh; the Sea is attracted by the cool Moon and not by the hot Sun." 
Not only is the colour Blue associated with the Moon, but also green in olden times. The beautiful green spectrum of silver is nothing new, but was, in spite of the paucity and great inferiority of their optical instruments, well known to the ancient chemists and physicists. Silver and green were associated as far back as the days of Hermes. Luna, or Astarte (the Hermetic Silver), is an ancient symbol. It is a Hermetic axiom that “the cause of the splendour and variety of colours lies deep in the affinities of nature; and there is a singular and mysterious alliance between colour and sound." 
The Kabalists place their 'middle nature' in direct relation with the Moon; and the green ray occupies the centre point between the others, being placed in the middle of the spectrum. 
According to the religious beliefs of the Ophites, Ildabaoth, the “Son of Darkness', and the Creator of the material world, was made to inhabit the planet Saturn, which identifies him with the Jewish Jehovah, who was Saturn himself, according to the Ophites, and is by them denied his Sinaitic name. 
From Ildabaoth emanated six spirits, who dwell respectively with their Father in the seven planets. These are Saba, or Mars; Adonai-Sol, or the Sun; levo, the Moon; Eloi, Jupiter; Astaphoi, Mercury (spirit of water in this case); and Ouraios, or Venus, (spirit of fire here). In their 
functions and descriptions as given, these seven planets are identical with the Hindu Sapta Loca, the seven places, planes or spheres, or the superior and inferior worlds; and they represent also the Kabalistic seven spheres. 
The monograms of these Gnostic planets are Buddhistic too; the latter differing but slightly from those of the usual astrological 'Houses'. 
We trust that you will give your strictest attention to these various references to the Moon and its characteristics, for they have an important bearing on that which is to follow. 
May the Sun-Path be yours. 
Your Hidden Master. 
