SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 21. 

Dear Disciple, 
We have, in our previous Lectures, referred at times to 'higher evolved' human beings. We have mentioned artists, sculptors, writers, poets, students of Occult Wisdom who understand the Great Cosmic Laws; we have also referred to humans who are not so evolved, and who dwell in the darkness of ignorance and non-understanding. 
Let us go back one step further and meditate for a few moments on animals and their mental faculties or their instincts. You as an evolved thinker and student of the Holy Laws, will not be so ignorant as to deny animals the simple faculty of thinking and planning; no matter how primitive these thoughts and instincts may be when compared with the possibly higher intelligence and instincts of Man. 
Let us for a few moments imagine an intelligent anthropoid ape to be disembodied, in other words, deprived of its physical body and in possession of an astral — though not an immortal body. In books and magazines, or in reports of genuine séances, you will often find references to instances where apparitions of 'departed' pet animals have been seen. Therefore upon spiritualistic testimony, we must think that such animal ‘spirits' do appear, although we reserve the right of concurring with the Ancients that the forms are but tricks of the elementals as a rule! Once the door of communication between the terrestrial and the spiritual worlds is opened, what prevents the ape from producing physical phenomena such as he sees human ‘spirits' produce? And why may not these excel in cleverness of ingenuity many of those which have been witnessed in spiritualistic circles? Let the spiritualists answer!! 
The Orang-utan of Borneo is little, if any, inferior to the savage man in intelligence. Nay, they defeat him in the pitched battles which have taken place sometimes between the apes and certain villages whose inhabitants have offended the anthropoids in some way. By superior strategy the apes generally win the battle and destroy and utterly rout the natives. This is a well-known fact, attested by white travellers who have witnessed such desperate contests. You can find full details for instance in the book entitled: "The Laws of the Wilderness' by Isadore Martian, published by Sampson Low. 
Wallace and other great naturalists give instances of the wonderful acuteness of the orang-utan, although its brains are inferior in cubic capacity to the most undeveloped savages. These apes lack but speech to be men of low grade; and even a primitive sort of guttural speech of a kind is credited to them by hunters and others who have made a study of the habits of such animals. 
Sentinels are placed by monkeys; sleeping chambers are selected and built by orang-utans; they have prevision of danger and make cer tain calculations which show more than instinct; they have leaders whom they obey; and the exercise of many of their faculties certainly entitles them to a place at least on a level with many a flat-headed Australian savage. Wallace himself remarks that: “The mental requirements of savages, and the faculties actually exercised by them, are very little above those of the animals" (The Limits of Natural Selection as Applied to Man, A. R. Wallace, 1869). 
People assume that there can be no apes in the other worlds because apes have no ‘souls'. But apes have as much intelligence it appears as some men; why then, should these men, in no way superior to the apes, have immortal spirits, and the apes none? The materialists will answer that neither the one nor the other has a “spirit', but that annihilation overtakes each at physical death. But the spiritual philosophers of all times have agreed that man occupies a step only one degree higher than the animal, and is possessed of that something which the animal lacks. The Ancients taught that while man is a trinity of body, astral spirit and immortal soul, the animal is but a duality — a being having a physical body and an astral spirit animating it. This is but partially right!! 
Scientists can distinguish no difference in the elements compos ing the bodies of men and animals; and the Kabalists agree with them so far as to say that the astral bodies (or, as the physicists would call it, life-principle') of animals and men are identical in essence. Physical man is but the highest development of animal life. 
If, as the scientists tell us, even thought is matter, and every sensation of pain or pleasure, every transient desire is accompanied by a disturbance of ether; and that some bold speculators say that thought is conceived to affect the matter of another Universe simultaneously with this; why then, should not the gross, brutish thought of an orang-utan, or a cat or dog, impressing itself on the ethereal waves of the astral light, as well as that of man, assure the animal continuity of life after death, or 'a future state'? 
The Kabalists aver-rightly — that it is unphilosophical to admit that the astral body of man survives corporeal death, and at the same time assert that the astral body of an animal is resolved into independent atoms or molecules. That which survives as an individuality after the death of the astral body, is the astral soul, or rather the Higher Mind, which Plato, in the Timæus and Gorgias calls the mortal soul, for according to the Hermetic doctrine, it throws off its more material particles at every progressive change into a higher sphere. The astral spirit, or higher mind, is contained in a faithful duplicate of the earthly body, both in a physical and spiritual sense. The higher mind dwells within that astral body during the whole time between two incarnations, until that Mind is forced to reincarnate again on earth in most cases. Where it exists during that time, and how it acts will be fully discussed later, when we shall also discuss the various exceptions to the above rule. 
The Divine part of Man — the real Soul — the highest and utterly immortal Spirit, which is positive in its nature (and never incarnates in a material body) can be neither punished nor rewarded. To maintain such a doctrine would be at the same time absurd and blasphemous, for it is not merely a flame lit at the central and inexhaustible Flame of Divine Light, but actually a portion of it, and of identical Essence. It assures immortality to the individual astral being in proportion to the willingness of the latter to receive it. 
The Spiritual part of Man that does incarnate in a human body is that negative Higher Mind; it is the counterpart of the Soul, and until it has slaked off all material impurities of acting and thinking it cannot join the Soul — which accompanies it at all stages of its progress in or out of the material or the astral body, and it must be regarded as a faithful and loving Watcher, Guide, and Guardian Angel at all those stages of life on earth or in the astral worlds. This Spiritual Soul-part of Man's material Higher Mind is that Guide we hear so much about in the cases of genuine trance-mediumship. In very special cases the Higher Mind can perceive it as a golden flame, surrounded by exquisite colours and patterns, and in the midst of the flame is seen the Spiritual counterpart, Prototype, or form of the being whose material or astral body is reflected by it or from it. The Higher Mind of a pure and/or evolved human being can also see the golden flame of other souls if he or she is worthy of it on account of Services rendered in some way during one or more of its incarnations; or if it has evolved sufficiently along its Path of Evolution to be able to attune with such Sublime Spiritual Conditions. 
We have said before that one should feel pity towards the erring human being who has not evolved sufficiently to attune with the Principle of Love; God's greatest Attribute. This does not mean that one should condone all evil doing in a maudlin, sentimental manner. If a person is incorrigible, refuses the helping hand, and insists on following the paths of hatred, cruelty and other deadly sins, he should be isolated and placed under the control of those who have sufficient true wisdom and real kindness to deal justly with those lowly evolved beings. But we should always remember that so long as the man in whom are contained the principles of flesh and spirit keeps within the limits of the Law of spiritual continuity, and so long as he has not condemned himself to descend in the end to the lower realms of matter after bodily death, and so long as the Divine Spark lingers in him, however faintly, he is on the road to immortality in the future state. 
But those who resign themselves to a materialistic existence, shutting out the Divine radiance shed by their own souls at the beginning as well as during their earthly pilgrimages, and who stifle the warning voice of that faithful sentry, often called conscience, which serves as a focus to cast the Light within the Higher Mind — such beings as these, having left behind Conscience and Soul, and having embedded themselves entirely in the morass of the material, they will of necessity have to follow its laws. 
Matter is as indestructible and eternal as the Immortal Spirit itself, but only in its atoms and electrons, and not as organised forms such as we know on earth. The body of so grossly materialistic a person as described above, having been deserted by its immortal soul, even before death — because his Higher Mind gave way to the lower (which is entirely material) and so utterly rejected the Soul — when bodily death occurs the plastic material, or astral body, following the laws of blind matter, shapes itself thoroughly into the mould which vice or wilful ignorance have been preparing for it gradually through the earth lives of the individual. Plato says that it assumes the form of that ‘animal to which it resembled in its evil ways' during life. But the real truth of the matter is that it either exists as an elementary (not an elemental), which is the practically empty shell' or astral body, devoid of the guidance of the true Divine Spirit or Soul – which it had previously rejected and denied-and which shell fades out gradually into nothing tangible; or, it may descend into the lower realms below the earth-plane, and there await another chance to redeem itself in yet another incarnation, for God's patience is almost endless. 
Again we remind you that we are talking here of that negative principle called the Higher Mind; it is still that, even if that Mind has sunk very low indeed in the scale of Goodness and Evolution. Plato adds that: "It is an Ancient saying that the Souls (the Higher Mind in 
our terminology) departing hence exist in Hades and return hither again and are produced from the dead....But those who are found to have lived an eminently holy life (or those who have concentrated their Minds on goodness and beauty of all kinds), these are they who arrive at the pure abode ABOVE AND DWELL ON THE UPPER PARTS of the earth” (or the ethereal regions of course). In Phædrus, again, Plato says that when man has ended his first (?) life (on earth), some go to places of punishment beneath the earth. This region below the earth the Kabalists do not understand as a place inside the earth, but maintain it to be a sphere, far inferior in perfection to the earth, and far more material. And this is correct. 
In our next talk we will develop the question of the ‘animal soul'. May your Higher Mind attune with the Celestial Worlds. 
Your Hidden Master. 
N.B. This Lecture completes another step forward and you may write 
to us as usual if you wish. 
