SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER, 
Grade 1. Number 34. 

Dear Disciple, 
It has been demonstrated numerically and geometrically that (a) Arets, earth', Adam, 'man' and H-adam-h, are cognate with each other, and are personified in the Bible under one form, like the Egyptian and Hebrew Mars, God of Generation; and (b) that Jehovah, or Jah, is Noah, for: Jehovah is Noah' in Hebrew, would be literally INCH in English. Noah is a divine permutation, and the Kabalists who are accustomed to the incessant permutations of Biblical names, once they are interpreted properly, will understand. Noah carries in his ark, or Argha (the Moon), the germs of all living things, worships before the 'Body of Adam', which body is the image — or reflection of the Creator, and a Creator itself. Hence Adam is called the "Prophet of the Moon", and the Argha or ‘Holy of Holies' of the Yod. This also shows the origin of the Jewish popular belief that the face of Moses 'is in the Moon' — i.e. the spots of the Moon, for Moses and Jehovah are kabalistically permutations too. 
There is no greater riddle in Science, no problem more hopelessly insoluble to it, than the question: "What is the Age of the Sun and Moon, the Earth and Man?” Science knows absolutely nothing about the ages of the World, or even the length of its Geological Periods. When later on we shall study these Mysteries there will be some astounding revelations if you have not gone into this subject before under the guidance of Occult Science. You will learn also how the Earth's axis changes gradually its inclination to the ecliptic - and back again to its original position — so that the polar regions become the equatorial with their luxurious growth and heat, and vice versa. 
Just as the Moon is in one sense "The Lord of Death', so she is in another 10, the Moon-Goddess of generation, for she is Isis, and she is Eve, the Great Mother. 
It has been said with regard to IO's wanderings, according to the ancient teachings (these wanderings having to do with the above mentioned changes of the earth's axis) that the records of these travels have no consistency with our own known geography. This is due to the fact that when the earth's axis changes, the Moon will circle around our globe over parts different from those which she circled before. 
First of all there is the journey and wanderings from place to place of the Race of Man from which the so-called 'tenth', or Kalkī Avatāra is to issue forth. (The Kalkī Avatāra is the Great Avatar who is to come at the consummation of the present - Kali - Age. This Avatar is, according to the Brāhmans, another incarnation of Vishnu, who becomes identical with Brahmā). This race has been called the “Kingly Race born in Argos". But this Argos has no reference to the Argos in Greece. It comes from arg, or arka — the female generative power symbolised in the Moon — the navi-formed Argha of the Mysteries: meaning the Queen of Heaven. 
Eustathius shows that, in the dialect of the Arg-ians, IO signified the Moon; while Esotericism explains it as the divine Androgyne, or the Mystic Ten (10); and in Hebrew 10 is the perfect number — or Jehovah. Arghya, in Sanskrit, is the libation cup, the navi-form or boat-shaped vessel in which flowers and fruit are offered to the Deities. Arghyanāth is the title of the Mahā Chohan, meaning the ‘Lord of Libations'; and Arghyavarsha, the ‘Land of Libations'; is the mystery name of that region which extends from Kailāsa mountain nearby to the Shamo Desert — from within which the Kalkī Avatāra is expected. The Airyāna-Varsedya of the Zoroastrians, as a locality, is identical with it. It is said to have been situated between the Sea of Aral, Baltistan and Little Tibet; but in olden times its area was far larger, as it was the birth-place of physical humanity, of which IO is the Mother and symbol. 
In her wanderings she has to quit Europe and go to Asia's continent, reaching there the highest of the mountains of the Caucasus, and her instructions are: “When thou hast crossed the flood, limit betwixt two continents, fronting the burning East" that she must travel eastward, after passing the ‘Kimmerian Bosphorus', and cross what is the Volga and now Astrakhān on the Caspian Sea. After this she will encounter "fierce northern blasts” and cross thither to the land of the 'Arimaspian Host' (East of Herodotus' Scythia) to — "Plato's gold-abounding flood.” 
This is rightly conjectured by Professor Newman to have meant the Ural, the Arimaspi of Herodotus being "the recognised inhabitants of the golden region." There IO was ordained to found a colony for herself and her sons. There is no need to pursue the subject any further at this stage; let it suffice that it has a profound meaning which will be made clear in time. It has a bearing too on the semi universal Deluge known to Geology — the first Glacial Period - and it shows that it must have occurred just at the time allotted to it by the secret Teachings: namely 200,000 years in round figures, after the commencement of our present (Fifth) Race, or, at the time assigned to it by some scientists: i.e., about 850,000 years ago, showing once again that the Ancients knew at least 'something of the modern discoveries of Science. 
Enoch, when speaking of the “great inclination of the Earth”, which "is in travail”, is quite significant and clear. 
The Moon was called 'The Lord of Ghosts' by the Akkadians - a most significant appellation; in Northern Babylonia he was the God of Nipur (Niffer), and in ancient Egyptian the word 'Nefer' means 'the beautiful', the ‘God' or 'Goddess', 'sacred fire', and so on. 
In Babylonia it is the Mulil who caused the waters of the Flood to fall from heaven on earth, because of which Xisuthrus would not allow him to approach his altar. 
As the modern Assyriologists have ascertained, it is the Northern Nipur which is the centre whence Chaldean Black Magic spread; and Eridu (the Southern) which was the primitive seat of the worship of the culture God, the God of Divine Wisdom – the Sun-God being the Supreme Deity everywhere in olden times. With the Jews, the Moon is connected with Israel's Jehovah and his seed, for Ur was the chief seat of the worship of the Moon-God, and Abraham is said to have come from Ur, when from A-BRA(H)M, he becomes Abraham. 
The Sun (the Father), the Moon (the Mother), and Mercury-Thoth (the Son), were the earliest 'Trinity' of the Egyptians, who personified them in Osiris, Isis and Thoth (Tahuti or Hermes). In the Gnostic Gospel ‘Pistis Sophia', the seven great Gods, were divided into two Triads, added to which was the Highest God (the Sun), they are the lower Triple Powers, whose powers reside respectively in Mars, Mercury and Venus, and the higher Triad — the three 'unseen' Gods, who dwell in the Moon, Jupiter and Saturn. 
Astoreth was in one sense an impersonal symbol of Nature, the Ship of Life, carrying throughout the boundless Sidereal Ocean the germs of all Being. And when she was not identified with Venus, like every other 'Queen of Heaven', to whom cakes and buns were offered in sacrifice, Astoreth became the reflection of the Chaldean “Nuah, the Universal Mother" (the female Noah, considered as one with the Ark), and the female Triad, Ana, Belita and Davkina; called, when blended into one, 'Sovereign Goddess, Lady of the Nether Abyss, Mother of Gods, Queen of the Earth, and Queen of Fecundity'. Later, Belita or Tamtu (the Sea), the Mother of the City of Erech (the great Chaldean Necropolis) became Eve; and now she is Mary the Virgin in the Latin Church, represented as standing on the Crescent Moon, and, at times, on the Globe, to vary the programme. 
Timæus the Locrian, speaking of her as 'Arka', calls her "the Principle of best things”; and the word 'arcane', or ‘hidden', 'secret', is derived from this: “To no one is the Arcane shown except to the - Most High”, says the Codex Nazaraeus, alluding to Nature the female, and Spirit the male power. 
Aesculapius, as a Sun-God, was called Archagetas, “born from the Archa", the divine Virgin-Mother of the Heavens. 
The mystic word ALM, which the prophet Mahomet prefixed to many chapters of the Koran, alludes to her as the Alm, the Immaculate Virgin of the Heavens. And – the sublime ever falling into the ridiculous — it is from this root Alm that we have to derive the word Almah — the Egyptian dancing-girls which latter 'virgins' are of the same type as the Nautchees of India, and the (female) Kadeshim, the ‘holy ones' of the Jewish Temples; consecrated to Jehovah, who represented both sexes — whose holy functions in the Israelite fanes were identical with Nautchees. 
This Lecture completes another step forward in our work; but as the great subject we are dealing with is not yet complete we request that you wait with any questions until such time as we shall indicate. 
May the Blessings of Wisdom be yours. 
Your Hidden Master. 
