SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 30. 

Dear Disciple, 
“The Queen of Night”, riding in the majesty of her peerless Light in Heaven, throwing all, even Hesperus, into darkness, has been a favourite theme with all the poets of Christendom, from Milton to Shakespeare down to the latest versifier. But the refulgent Lamp of Night, with her suite of stars unnumbered, spoke only to the imagination of the profane. Until lately, Religion and Science had nought to do with the beautiful mythos, as it is said in the secret teachings. 
But this is true only up to a point, and only so far as Europe is concerned. In India, as well as in the whole of the Orient, the Moon, the Lady Phoebe, has been the subject of intense study in both Religion and Science. This much must have become clear to you already after reading the previous Lectures. 
The Moon stands in closer relations to Earth than any other sidereal orb; for as the Sun is the Giver of Life to the whole planetary system — our own Kosmos, that is to say — the Moon is, in a way, the Giver of Life to our Globe, inasmuch as all living human beings of all times (with certain exceptions) have arrived here from the Moon, where, as we said before, they dwell during the times between their incarnations. This is literally true in one way and symbolical in another, and the initiates of all times understood and knew it. She is, moreover, pre-eminently the Deity of the Christians (although they do not realise it) through the Mosaic and Kabalistic Jews; in fact, ever since the last initiated Father of the Church died, carrying with him into his grave and beyond — the secrets of the Pagan Temples. To Origen, or Clemens Alexandrinus, the Moon was Jehovah's living symbol; the Giver of Life and the Giver of Death, sending out and drawing back the Higher Minds of men; she was the dispenser of Being in our World, on Earth. 
With the Ancient Egyptians she was Heqet (Hekat or Hecate) in Hell, the Goddess of Death, who ruled over Magic and Enchantments. She is, as the personified Moon, whose phenomena are Triadic, Diana-Hecate-Luna, the three-in-one, and the prototype of our Trinity, which has not always been entirely male. 
The number 7, so prominent in the Bible, so sacred in the seventh day or Sabbath, came to the Jews from antiquity, deriving its origin from the four-fold number seven in the 28 days of the Lunar Month, each septenary portion thereof being typified by one quarter of the Moon, or one week. 
The origin of Lunar worship is untraceable by exact (?) Science, which rejects all tradition; while for Theology, which, under the guidance of the crafty Popes, has put a brand on every fragment of literature that does not bear the imprimatur of the Church of Rome, its archaic history is a sealed book. 
There have been many arguments about which is the more ancient, the Egyptian or the Aryan Hindu religious Philosophy, but in the first place it does not matter, and secondly both received their teachings from the White Adepts of Atlantis; the origin of the White Brotherhood, to which so many sects and cults of so-called 'Occultism' lay such impudent and unfounded claims. Let it suffice that both Solar and Lunar worship are two of the oldest religions in the world — but not the oldest!! 
In Egypt, Mau, the cat, a lunar symbol, was sacred to Isis, who was the Moon in one sense, just as Osiris was the Sun in one sense, and the cat is often seen on top of the Sistrum in the hand of the Goddess. This animal was held in great veneration in the City of Bubastis, which went into deep mourning on the death of the sacred cats, because Isis, as the Moon, was particularly worshipped in that city of mysteries. 
The astronomical symbolism connected with it has never been better described than by Gerald Massey in his 'Lectures', 'Natural Genesis' and especially in his masterwork, 'Ancient Egypt: The Light of the World. All these books are well worth reading if you can obtain them. In the Metamorphoses of Ovid you can read how Diana, hiding in the moon under the shape of a cat tried to escape from the pursuit of Typhon. The Moon, in Egypt was both the 'Eye of Horus' and the ‘Eye of Osiris', the Sun. This applies also to the Cynocephalus. The dog-headed ape was a glyph to symbolise the Sun and Moon in turn, although it is more a Hermetic than religious symbol, for it is also the hieroglyph of Mercury, the planet, and the Alchemical Philosophers say that: “Mercury has to be ever near Isis, as her Minister, for without Mercury neither Isis nor Osiris can accomplish anything in the Great Work”, or Opus Magnum. This has a deep meaning; for as Mercury is the Fire, or sacred Flame, neither can the Sun exist without it and send Life throughout our Cosmos, nor can Isis, the Moon, send into incarnation living beings without that Flame, the Fire or Spark of Life within them, for when the Fire of Life is absent there is the coldness of death. 
Charles Dickens refers in one of his books to "the mysterious fire that is in everything”. Only a great observer could have said this, and 
it is perfectly true, for there is fire — and life — in everything, as you have realised through our study of the atom. But the human entity, whether in a human earthly body or an astral body is always accompanied by that fire of Mercury, and when the ‘Moon' withdraws the astral body from the earthly one, the former is accompanied by that fire, until a new body is found for it, or until it escapes entirely from the Moon's dominion and proceeds to a higher Realm from whence it does not return to Earth, except in certain circumstances, and by its own free will.
Mercury was also the Messenger, appointed to keep time during the daily solar and lunar phenomena, and was connected in many other ways with the sun and the moon; and it is taught that Life precedes Form, and survives the last atom. Life is the Root that never dies, and the sparks of Life are called the Wicks that draw from the Three-tongued Flame, shot out by the Seven Lords of Life, symbolised by the seven Planets, their Flame — the Beams and Sparks of the Moon, reflected in the running Waves of all the Rivers (of Life) on Earth. 
The Three-tongued Flame is the immortal spiritual Triad, and the four Wicks are the four lower Principles. The Flame is represented by the Triangle with its point at the apex — the three highest Planes or Spiritual Worlds — and below that Triangle is placed a square — the four Planes below the Triad of the three Higher ones, of which the Earth-plane is the lowest. This double glyph is also a symbol of the seven-fold man. 
Though the Moon is a dead body its particles are full of life, active and destructive life, that is to say, in the same manner that a dead human body is full of the same kind of life, but both must be destroyed in the ultimate. Therefore the emanations of the Moon must be maleficent and at the same time beneficent, just as flowers and grass in graveyards are more thriving and luxuriant than anywhere else, while at the same time the corpse emanations are deadly and can kill. So the Moon gives life and destroys it at one and the same time, though not to the same beings at the same time. For that reason the Moon has been regarded as a friend of the black sorcerers and a foe to the unwary, and for this reason no person can bear to be under the direct radiation of the full Moon for any length of time, as we have pointed out before. 
And though those wicked magicians, like some of the present day Tantrikas of Bengal, understand the Moon's properties, as does every Occultist, her real nature has ever remained a closed book for Physicists. 
In our very highest Teachings there are a number of important secrets in connection with the Moon to be revealed. But they cannot be told except to those who have proved themselves to be absolutely worthy in every way, and they can be understood only after much study and mastery of all the exercises for the awakening of the inner Principles of each. 
Herodotus tells us that in Egypt there are two kinds of Ibises; one quite black, that is credited with fighting and exterminating the “winged serpents” which came every spring from Arabia, and infested the country. And the other Ibis was black and white, and sacred to the Moon for obvious reasons. 
But the more correct Esoteric Truth underlying such popular myths is that Hermes, as shown by Abenephius in “De Culte Egypt”, watched over the Egyptians under the form of the Ibis, and taught them the Occult Arts and Sciences. This simply means that the Ibis Religiosa had, and has, “magical” properties in common with many other birds, the albatross pre-eminently, and the mythical white swan, the Swan of eternity of time, the Kalahansa. In our next lecture this theme will be developed further. 
As this lecture completes another step we ask you this time not to send a list of questions, for we are in the middle of a subject which will be cleared up gradually, and any questions you may ask now will in all probability be answered automatically. But if you wish to ask us about anything else we shall be pleased to hear from you as usual. 
May the good influences from the Moon reach and support you. 
Your Hidden Master. 
