SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1 Number 32 

Dear Disciple, 
The Moon is the satellite of the Earth in one respect only, viz., that physically the Moon revolves round the Earth. But Occult Science teaches that in every other respect it is the Earth which is the satellite of the Moon, and not vice versa. Startling as the statement may seem it is not without confirmation from worldly scientific knowledge. It is evidenced by the tides and by the cyclic changes in many forms of disease, which coincide with the lunar phases; it can be traced in the growth of plants, and it is very marked in the phenomena of human conception and gestation. 
Every religion knew the importance of the Moon, especially the Jewish nation, and it has been remarked by many observers of psychical and physical phenomena. But, so far as Science knows (although nowadays we find some European Scientists who have made a deep study of the Moon's influence on things terrestrial), the Earth's action on the Moon is confined to the physical attraction, which causes her to circle in its orbit. Should any objector insist that this fact alone is sufficient evidence that the Moon is truly the Earth's satellite, one may reply by asking whether a mother who walks round her child's cradle, keeping watch over the infant, is the subordinate of the child and dependent upon it? Though in one sense she is its satellite, yet she is certainly older and more developed than the child she watches. And later on we shall explain to you that not only is the Moon not the Earth's satellite, but that she is older too. The Moon plays the largest and most important part in the formation of the Earth, as well as in the peopling thereof with human beings, and withdrawing their astral bodies, Higher Minds and Vital Sparks — back to the Moon - when their allotted span of life is over. All this is closely connected with the seven classes of Pitris, Adepts or Holy Sages - Sons of God - whom we mentioned before, and who will be discussed in due course. We may go further, and call the Moon the Mother of the Earth in one sense; in fact the correlative forces in the Queen of Night that lie latent for modern Science, but are fully active in the knowledge of the great Occultists, explain well the thousand-and-one images under which the Moon was represented by the Ancients, who were profoundly learned in the Selenic mysteries. 
The whole Pantheon of the lunar Gods and Goddesses, Nephtys or Nebt-Het, Proserpina, Melitta, Venus, etc., etc., on the one hand, and Apollo, Dionysus, Adonis, Bacchus, Osiris, Atys, Thammuz and so on, on the other, all show on the face of their names and titles (those of "Sons", and “Husbands” of their "Mothers") their identity with the Christian Trinity. In every religious system the Gods were made to merge their functions as Father, Son and Husband into one, and the Goddesses were identified as Wife, Mother and Sister of the male God; the former synthesising the human attributes as the “Sun”, the “Giver of Life”, the latter merging all the other titles in the grand synthesis known as Maia, Maya, Maria, etc., a generic name. Maia, in its forced derivation, has come to mean with the Greeks, “Mother”, from the root ma (nurse), and even gave her name to the month of May; which was sacred to all these Goddesses before it became consecrated to Mary. The Roman Catholics are indebted to the Pagan Plutarch for the idea of dedicating the month of May to the Virgin; for Plutarch shows that “ May is sacred to Maia or Vesta”, our mother-earth, our nurse and nourisher personified (Aulus Gellius sub voc. Maia). When we speak in future about the planets and the Seven Sons of Light under their various appellations, named after these planets, and often identified with them by those who do not know, you should remember that these planets are often accepted for purposes of Judicial Astrology only by the Occultist. 
The astro-theogonical division differs from them, for the Sun, being a central star, and not a planet, stands, with its seven planets, in more occult and mysterious relations to our Globe than is generally known. The Sun is therefore accepted as the great Father of all the "Seven Fathers”, and this accounts for the variations found between the Seven and the Eight Great Gods of Chaldean and other countries. Neither are the Earth, nor the Moon, nor yet the stars, for another reason, anything more than substitutes, used for esoteric purposes. Yet, even with the exclusion of the Sun, Earth and Moon from the calculation, the Ancients knew of seven planets. 
There are therefore seven primary or principal planets as far as we are concerned. Of these Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury and Venus are the four exoteric planets, and the three others are the heavenly bodies in direct astral and psychic communication, morally and physically, with the Earth, its guides and watchers; the visible orbs furnishing our humanity with its outward and inward characteristics, and their Regents or Rectors with our vital Sparks and spiritual faculties. We may state here that neither Uranus, Neptune or Pluto are included in the three esoteric Planets, not named as yet, for these come under a different aspect of our studies. (The Roman Catholic Theology mentions seventy planets as influencing the destinies of the inhabitants of the Earth – connected with the seventy elders of the people of Israel; for each people or nation had its direct Watcher, Guardian and Father in Heaven - a Planetary Spirit, and the Regents of these seventy planets are meant, not the orbs themselves. Moreover the word seventy is a play and a blind upon 7 x 7 of the subdivisions). 
So far as the Planet Mars is concerned, he was regarded by the Pagan astrologers simply as the personified strength of the one Highest impersonal Deity. 
In the religions of the so-called civilised nations (who use flame throwers, poison-gasses, and destroy women and children in multitudes by a rain of death from the air, as it has been foretold) Mars is called St. Michael, the strength of God — a mere change of names, while the characters behind the masks remain the same! Please remember that Origen names IAO as the Regent, or Rishi of the Moon; and, by the way, Sabaoth as that of Mars. 
How difficult it is to get rid of the Pagan “superstitions” is shown in the case of St. Bernard, who addresses the Virgin Mary in this wise; “The Sun-Christ lives in Thee and Thou livest in Him", and he compares the Virgin to the Moon, the Queen of Heaven. When we reach our Higher Degrees you will see that the Saint was right in every way, for what he has stated is the subject and the substance of a most Divine Law, now forgotten except by a few; although there was, during the latter half of the 19th. Century, an inspired seer to whom some of the details of these great Laws were revealed in vision. Unfortunately that same seer, not being a trained Scientist, allowed his imagination to run away with him, thus coming to some erroneous conclusions; this is always one of the greatest dangers, heaping ridicule on Occultism when such seers cannot substantiate their visions in a rational manner. 
The reason of early Christian and later Roman Catholic Astrolatry, or the symbolical worship of Sun and Moon, a worship identical with that of the Gnostics, though less philosophical and pure than the “Sun-Worship” of the Zoroastrians, is a natural consequence of its birth and origin. The adoption by the Latin Church of such symbols as Water, Fire, Sun, Moon and Stars, and many others is simply a continuation by the early Christians of the old worship of the Pagan nations — thus endowing the Christian Religion with much beauty, though the real interpretation has been lost. 
Just as milliards of bright sparks dance on the waters of the ocean under the silver light of the Moon, so our evanescent Personalities twinkle and dance on the Waters of Illusion; to disappear when the light-giving and unknown beams of the seven mysterious rays from the Sun and the light of the Moon shine down upon us (who are ensnared within that same Illusion) no more. 
You should know that the Pitris we have mentioned are regarded as human Deities, and as our Ancestors, because they created physical Man. And Origen calls IAO the “Mystery God, and the Regent of the Moon”. And the Agnishvatta, the Kumaras (the seven Mystic Sages), are Solar Deities (though they are Pitris also); and these latter are the fashioners of the Inner Man (the Higher Mind). They are the “Sons of Fire", because they are the first beings called "Minds” in the secret Teachings, evolved from the primordial Fire. Does it not say in Deuteronomy 4:24. "The Lord – is a consuming fire”? And in Thessalonians 1:7, 8. “The Lord shall be revealed — with His mighty Angels in flaming fire". And in Acts 2:3. The Holy Ghost descended on the Apostles as "cloven tongues like as of fire”. And in Revelation 19:11 13. “And I saw Heaven opened, and behold a white horse, and he that sat upon him – and his name is called the Word of God — a flame of fire”? 
But that Fire is not one that burneth the pure and the righteous; for in it is contained that Divine Region which the Lord Jesus showed unto St. Peter, as you will remember. 
We shall end this lecture with a quotation from Archbishop Laurence's translation of the ‘Book of Enoch”. “Behold, I have showed thee all things, O Enoch — Thou seest the sun, the moon, and those which conduct the stars of heaven, which cause all their operations, seasons, and arrivals to return. In the days of sinners the days shall be shortened — everything on earth shall be subverted - 
— the moon shall change its laws". Thus speaks Uriel to Enoch; for the Earth and Mankind, like the Sun, Moon and Planets, all have their growth, changes, development, and gradual evolution in their life periods; they are born, become infants, then children, adolescent, grown-up, they grow old, and finally die. 
As below, so Above!!! 
The “Days of Sinners” meant the days when the material shall be in full sway on Earth. At the present we are at the mid-point of one of the great epochs of humanity; the acme of materiality has been reached, and this is most marked in civilised countries. 
Where is humanity drifting in its blindness to true Spirituality? You may have already an inkling of it in this eighth month of our studies. May you rise above the Stream and find release from all material shackles while still on Earth. 
Your Hidden Master. 
