SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 33. 

Dear Disciple, 
In our previous Lectures we have spoken about the seven rays which the Sun sends out continuously into the vastnesses of our Kosmos, or Planetary System. One of these rays is called the Sushumna Sun-ray, as you know, and this is that ray which lights and feeds the Moon. This ray descends on a large scale to supply vegetation on Earth during daytime, and at night it is cast back to the Earth by the Moon, and penetrates man and animal during sleep and rest; for when they are in full activity during the daytime they are not so much affected by it when it comes direct from the Sun. 
The substance of this Ray (whether it comes direct from the Sun, or when it is reflected by the Moon) is called 'Nervous Ether', and it is the lowest Principle of the Primordial Essence which is LIFE. It is ‘Animal Vitality', diffused in all Nature, and acting according to the conditions it finds for its activity. It is not an animal product, but the living animal, flower or plant are its products. The animal tissues only absorb it according to the state of their health — as do also physical materials and structures in their primogenial state, from the moment of the birth of the Entity it is regulated, strengthened and fed by it. 
It holds the nervous system throughout in perfect tension during life. It is re-generated within the body and brought into action by healthy exercise; but when the demand for it is greater than the supply on account of over activity, its deficiency is indicated by nervous collapse or exhaustion. Too great an exuberance of it in the nervous system leads often to disease and death, and it is necessary to dispose of it by exercise; whatever form it takes. When it accumulates in the nervous centres during sleep it tones the muscles, thus bringing to the whole system a renewal of life. 
The body fully renewed by it, presents capacity for motion and fullness of form; the body bereft of it presents inertia, the configuration of shrunken death, and it seems to have lost something physical that was in it when it lived. The great mistake of Science is that it denies the existence of a divine or 'vital principle'. But the seeming absence of this life-fluid (which Paracelsus called the 'Liquor Vitae'), in a deserted body (after the astral body, vital spark and Higher Mind have left it), is the basis for an error into which many thinkers have fallen. It is still present in the 'dead' body — only: it has become latent, owing to the too morbid state of the tissues on which it has a hold no longer. But once the rigor mortis is absolute, the Liquor Vitae will reawaken into action, and it will begin its work on the atoms chemically.
This Nervous Ether may be poisoned; it may have diffused through it, by simple gaseous diffusion, other gases or vapours derived from without; it may derive from within certain products of substances swallowed and ingested; or gases of decomposition may be produced during disease in the body itself. It is also possible that the nervous ether of one person is poisoned by that of another, or by his ‘auric emanations.' 
In our Manifesto we mention, under Grade 1, sensible health exercises. In the above you may find a clue to that subject. The most common sense exercise is to work off the superfluity of nervous ether, gathered together in your muscles and nervous system, by any sort of labour — mental or physical — until you receive a warning from the body that it is tired. If, on the other hand, you have nothing to do, go for a walk or attend to sport without overdoing it. See further that you have sufficient sleep. This varies with every person, and no hard and fast rules can be laid down, but the brain-worker requires, very often, more sleep than the physical labourer. Each must watch himself and find out what suits him best. The main thing is to find a true balance in receiving this nervous ether and expending it. On the whole we have little faith in what is now known as 'working out'; for this is either not sufficient as a rule for those who lead a sedentary life, or it is overdone by the enthusiast. Find a balance in everything that is the only secret of health. 
Paracelsus says in reference to the nervous ether: "The Archaeus is of a magnetic nature, and attracts or repulses sympathetic or anti pathetic forces belonging to the same plane. The less power of resist ance for astral influences a person possesses, the more will he be subject to such influences. The vital force is not enclosed in Man, but radiates (within and around) him like a luminous sphere (the aura), and it may be made to act at a distance. It may poison the essence of life (blood) and cause diseases, or it may purify it after it has been made impure, and restore the body to health." 
Under sharp excitation it may vibrate as in a storm, and plunge every muscle under cerebral or spinal control into uncontrolled motion – unconscious convulsions. It is subordinate to, and emanates from, the ever-invisible, eternal and absolute One Life in a descending and re-ascending scale of hierarchic degrees, a true septenary ladder; with Sound, the Logos, at the upper end, and the inferior deities, inhabiting the astral spheres between the earth and ether (the inferior Pitris), at the lower. 
The Esoteric Doctrine teaches that there is an original primordial Prima Materia, divine and intelligent, the direct emanation of the Universal Mind, the Divine Light, emanating from the Logos — which originally formed the nuclei of all the ‘self-moving' orbs in Kosmos — including the self-moving electrons in the atoms! It is the informing ever-present moving power and life-principle, the Vital Soul of the Suns, Moons, Planets, and even of our Earth; the Prima Materia, or First Matter, is latent, the Logos active; He being the invisible Ruler and Guide of the gross Body of Matter attached to, clinging, and connected with the Soul of the Logoi, which is the Spiritual emanation of the Planetary Spirits. This is the Life-Principle contained within everything – including the atoms; the Soul, the Will, and the Consciousness of God. 
The Philosopher Kant's theory was that the matter of which the inhabitants of other Planets are formed is of a lighter and more subtle nature, and of a more perfect conformation, in proportion to their distance from the Sun. For — said he — the Sun is too full of Vital Electricity, the physical, life-giving principle. Therefore, the man on Mars would be more ethereal than we are, while those on Venus are more gross, though far more intelligent, less spiritual. 
This doctrine is not quite that of Occult Science; yet these Kantian theories are as metaphysical and transcendental as any Occult doctrines, and more than one man of Science would, if he dared, accept them, as Wolf did in his 'Hypothèses Cosmogoniques' written in the last century. 
From this Kantian concept to the Mahat (Mind), and Prakriti (original substance), of the Purānas is but one step. The admission of this by Science would be only the admission of a material cause, whether it would or would not stretch its belief to such metaphysical heights. But then, Mahat, the Mind, is a 'God', and Physiology admits ‘mind' only as a temporary function of the material brain; and no more. 
Science has always derided the idea of a Vital Principle; and in light, heat, electricity as well as in life itself, it can see nothing more than properties inherent in matter, thus denying the visible-life in all its phenomena, as well as the invisible actuality of the Vital Breath of God. 
But here, as in everything else, scientists and their 'opinions' differ widely, and there are independent men of science who accept similar views to those of Occult Science, although they use a different terminology. In connection with this we will quote the well known statement of Coleridge, in which he says: “It is highly worthy of observation that the inspired writings received by Christians are distinguishable from all other books pretending to inspiration, from the Scriptures of the Brahmins (sic), and even from the Koran, in their strong and frequent recommendation of truth”(!!!). 
Yes, TRUTH! The estimable writer could evidently not bear its Light!! With the Gnostics, the Sun in one aspect, and the Moon or Lunar Genius in another, were saluted by them as follows: the Sun as the generative Deity, and the Moon, “Thou that presidest over the Mysteries of the Father and the Son, who shinest in the night-time, holding the second rank, the first Lord of Death". The two combined, Sun and Moon, or their Regents, were conceived as Horus: “Seated on the Lotus, inscribed ABRAXAS IAO” – an address exactly parallel to the so frequently seen EIS ZEUS SARAPI on the contemporary heathen gems, and therefore to be translated only by: “Abraxas is the one Jehovah." 
The numerical or Kabalistic value of the name Abraxas refers directly to the Persian title of the God Mithras, Ruler of the year, worshipped from the earliest times under the appellation of IAO. It is only in his capacity of the Genius of the Moon – the latter being credited in the old cosmogony with being the parent of our Earth - that Jehovah (Iao) could ever be regarded as the Creator of our Globe and its Heaven, namely, the Firmament. 
The knowledge of all this will be no proof, however, to the average bigot. 
May the Light of Wisdom ever shine within your Mind. 
Your Hidden Master. 
