SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 31. 

Dear Disciple, 
When we consider the mythology of the peoples of olden times we must always remember that it is the repository of Man's most ancient Science, and what concerns us chiefly is this — when mythology is truly interpreted once again it is destined to be the death of those false theologies to which it has unwittingly given birth. When the false theologies disappear, then true prehistoric realities will be found, contained especially in the mythologies of the Aryans and ancient Hindus, and even the pre-Homeric Hellenes, for in them will be discovered aspects of true Science, History and Religion, couched in symbolical images such as modern man cannot even conceive — unless he receives that special training which The Order is proud to give and disseminate to its students. 
In modern phraseology a statement is sometimes said to be Mythical in proportion to its being untrue; but the ancient mythology was not a system or mode of falsifying in that sense. When the Egyptians portrayed the Moon as a Cat they were not so ignorant as to suppose that the Moon was a Cat; nor did their wandering fancies see any likeness in the Moon to a cat; nor was a cat-myth any mere expansion of verbal metaphor; nor had they any intention of making puzzles or riddles. 
They had observed the simple fact that the cat saw in the dark, and that its eyes became full-orbed and grew more luminous by night. The Moon was the seer by night in heaven, and the cat was its equivalent on earth; and so the cat was adopted as a representative, a natural sign, symbol or glyph, a living pictograph of the lunar orb. And so it followed that the Sun which sank down in the 'underworld' at night could also be called a cat, because it also saw in the dark. The name of the cat in Ancient Egypt was Mau, which denotes the seer, from mau – to see. One writer on mythology asserts that the Egyptians “imagined a great cat behind the sun, which is the pupil of the cat's eye”(!!!). But this is mere imagination on the part of that modern 'interpreter', and completely wrong of course. 
No man can interpret the ancient mythologies by giving rein to his unbridled fancy; he can interpret only when he knows the Occult Laws; for then he becomes a true Scientist, Historian and Theologian in the best and only sense of these terms. The Moon, as a cat, was the eye of the Sun because it reflected the Solar Light, and because that eye reflects the sun-image in its mirror. In the form of the Goddess Bast, or Pasht, the cat keeps watch for the Sun, with her paw holding down and bruising the head of the serpent of darkness, called the Sun's eternal enemy. This is a very correct exposition of the lunar mythos from its astronomical aspect. 
Selenography, however, is the least esoteric of the divisions of lunar symbology. To master thoroughly Selenognosis, one must become proficient in more than its astronomical meaning. The untiring researches of Western symbologists during the last few centuries have induced the most unprejudiced students of symbolism and occultism to see that without the aid of Symbology — with its seven departments of which the moderns know nothing at all — no ancient Scripture can ever be correctly understood. Symbology must be studied from every one of its aspects, for each nation had its own peculiar methods of expression. In short, no Egyptian papyrus, no Indian olla, no Assyrian tile, no Hebrew scroll, should be read and interpreted literally. If we take the symbols of the triangle, the horizontal or vertical line, the circle and the square each separately, or even the Moon in its sixteen digits, it is possible to interpret their meaning in a thousand different ways. And there lies the trap for the interpreter of symbols who has no real scientific Occult training. One who knows can make mincemeat of those 'interpretations of the ignorant each and every time they hold forth! 
Every scholar knows that to accept, for instance, the dead-letter of the Bible is equivalent to falling into a grosser error and superstition than any hitherto evolved by the brain of a savage. 
We may compare every ancient symbol, or mythological word picture or statement to a many-faceted diamond, each of whose facets includes not only several interpretations but relate also to several sciences. This is instanced in the just quoted interpretation of the cat symbolising the Moon or the Sun - an example of sidereal-terrestrial imagery; for the Moon has, with other nations than the Ancient Egyptians, many other meanings too. 
There is a great difference between an emblem and a symbol. An emblem comprises a larger series of thoughts than a symbol, which latter may be said rather to illustrate some single special idea. Hence, the symbols, lunar or solar, for example, of several countries, each illustrating such a special idea, or series of ideas, form collectively an esoteric emblem. The latter is a concrete visible picture or sign representing principles, or a series of principles recognisable by those who have received certain instructions; in other words: by initiates. An emblem is usually a series of graphic pictures viewed and explained allegorically, and unfolding an idea in panoramic views, one after the other. Thus the Hindu Purānas, the Mosaic and Christian Testaments - the Bible — and all other exoteric Scriptures are written emblems. 
All esoteric Societies have made use of emblems and symbols, such as the Pythagorean Society, the Eleusinia, The Hermetic Brethren and the Freemasons. Many of these emblems it is not proper to divulge to the general eye, and a very minute difference may make the emblem or symbol differ widely in its meaning. The magical sigilla, being founded on certain principles of number, partake of this character, and although monstrous or ridiculous in the eyes of the uninstructed, convey a whole body of doctrine to those who have been trained to recognise them. 
When we referred to the Moon as a dead body, for instance, we must realise that the Moon is dead only as regards her inner principles - i.e. psychically and spiritually, however absurd the statement may seem. Physically she is in reality like a semi-paralysed body. She is occasionally referred to aptly as "The Insane Mother', the great Sidereal lunatic. 
A Hindu initiated Yogi knows ten times more than the greatest European Physicist of the ultimate nature of solar and lunar light. Why is the Sushumna Ray believed to be that Ray which furnishes the Moon with its borrowed Light? (Sushumna — which is a Sanskrit word meaning: 'great happiness' — is with the Yogis: 
1. The Nadis, or nerve-channels, running along the spinal chord from the heart to the Brahmārandhrā, or 'third ventricle' of the brain. 
2. The spot at the base of the medulla oblongata where the Ida (the nerve-channel on the left side of the spinal chord) and the Pingala (that on the right side of the spinal chord) join. 
3. In Prana-Yama (the practise of controlling the breath) when respiration is alternately on the right and left sides. 
4. The first of the seven mystic rays of the sun - that which gives light to the Moon. 
Why is that Ray cherished by the initiated Yogi? Why is the Moon considered as the Deity of the Mind by these Yogis? 
We say, because light, or rather all its Occult properties, and every combination and correlation of it with other forces, mental, psychic and spiritual, was perfectly known to the Old Adepts. 
Had our wise men of science known as much of the mysteries of Nature as did the Ancient Aryans, they would surely never have imagined that the Moon was projected from the Earth. It is possible that they have been misled by the old Hindu myth of 'The Churning of the Ocean' (Space) by the Gods in a previous Manvantara, or World Cycle (about which more later on), in the pre-genetic day of our Planetary System where "the Rishis (are) milking the Earth, whose calf was Soma, the Moon." 
This has a deep Cosmographical meaning; and it is neither our Earth which is milked, nor was the Moon as we know her now the Moon of those distant times. 
The oldest permutation in Theogony, the Son becoming his own Father, and the Mother generated by the Son, has to be remembered and taken into consideration if the symbolical language of the Ancients is to be understood by us. Otherwise Mythology will be ever haunting Science as simply “the disease which springs up at a peculiar stage of human culture”! — as Renouf has observed gravely!! 
Our study of the Moon and associated subjects will be continued next week. 
May the emblem of Light illuminate you. 
Your Hidden Master. 
