SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER 
Grade 1. Number 42. 
Dear Disciple, 
According to the Greek myth, Apollo, the Sun, is born in a sidereal island called 'Asteria' – the 'golden star island' — the 'earth which floats in the air’, which is the equivalent of the Hindu golden 'Hiraya pura'; he is called the pure Agnus Dei, similar to the Indian God of Fire, Agni; and in the primeval myth he is exempt “from all sensual love". He is therefore a 'youth', one of those having Cosmic self-consciousness within the Highest Realm of the Divine, like Karttikeya, the God of War and the planet Mars, also called Skanda, who was said to be the Son of Shiva or Rudra, and was produced without the intervention of a woman; and he was as pure as Indra was in his earlier life, although the latter — the God of the firmament, the personified atmosphere — was not uncreated, and is represented as having a father and mother. 
In the Greek story Python, the 'Red Dragon', connects Apollo with Michael, who fights the Apocalyptic Dragon, seeking to attack the woman in childbirth, as Python attacks Apollo's Mother. 
Here we have a direct connection with Apollo, Indra, Karttikeya and Michael (as the Angelic form of Jehovah) the ‘Angel of the Sun', who is "like", and "one with, God”. Later ingenious interpretations for monotheistic purposes, elevated though they be into not-to-be questioned Church dogmas, prove nothing, except, perhaps the abuse of human authority and power. 
Apollo's two daughters, Phoebe and Hilæira, personifying the Dawn and the Twilight, are married to the Tyndaridæ, the twin brothers, who are an astronomical symbol, and stand for Day and Night. 
When the Androgynes, or Hermaphrodite humans of the 'Third Race' of Mankind became too "terrible in force, strength and prodigious ambition" (as described in Plato's 'Banquet), "Zeus divided them (into male and female separately) and Apollo, under his (Zeus) direction, closed up the skin". 
It is taught that the 'Sons of the Sun' are countless. Precisely; and these Sons of the Sun range from the highest Angels to all created beings and things, down to the very atoms - where the real complications commence. But never forget that the Sun is but a reflection of the Hidden Sun, or Hidden Unknown Deity. 
In Egypt the Crocodile was the Dragon. It was the dual symbol of Heaven and Earth, of Sun and Moon, and it was made sacred on account of its amphibious nature, to Osiris and Isis. According to Eusebius, the Egyptians represented the Sun in a ship as its pilot, this ship being carried along by a crocodile, “to show the motion of the Sun in the Moist” (space). The crocodile was, moreover, the symbol of Lower Egypt herself, the lower being the more swampy of the two countries. But the Alchemists claim another interpretation. They say that the symbol of the Sun in the Ship on the Ether of Space meant that the Hermetic Matter is the Principle, or basis, of Gold, or again, the philosophical Sun; the water, within which the crocodile is swimming, is that Water, or Matter made liquid; the Ship herself, finally, representing the Vessel of Nature in which the Sun, or the Sulphuric, igneous principle, acts as a pilot, because it is the Sun which conducts the work by His action upon the Moist, or Mercury. 
We have mentioned the Wisdom of the Hindus from time to time in these lectures, and we have quoted some of their Sacred books. As we are now discussing the Sun, its principles and its mythology and symbology, we deem it the right moment to tell you a little about them that may be of interest. The great teachers of the Higher Knowledge, as well as the Brahman Initiates themselves used to keep the real secrets hidden from the majority of men, and such books as the 'Upanishads', which were complete originally and attached to 'Brahmanas' (which contain formulas for rituals, rules, regulations and so forth), were used for the instruction of the Chelas, or pupils, who were preparing for Initiation. The 'Upanishads' used to treat of and expound the secret meaning of the Vedic texts, just as does the Kabalah, to a certain extent, to the Jewish Bible. In other words: “they contain the beginning and the end of all human knowledge, but they have ceased to reveal it, since the days of Buddha", as it is said so succinctly in the Secret Doctrine. 
When Gautama the Buddha discovered the withholding of Truth from mankind by the Brahmans, he decided to reveal it himself, with the result that the sacred books were mutilated by the Priests, and the true revelations hidden in their innermost sanctums. The reason why Gautama came to his decision was that he had discovered that the Hindu secret teachings differed but little from those which were disseminated by the great "Teachers of Life”, who inhabited the snowy ranges of the 'Himālayas; Teachers who were also known as the “Sons of Wisdom", and of the "Fire Mist", and the "Brothers of the Sun”, in the Chinese records. Si-dzang (Tibet) is mentioned in the manuscripts of the sacred library of the Province of Fo-kien as the great seat of Occult Learning from time immemorial, ages before the appearance of Buddha. Your Masters know and have met many times a representative of these great Teachers who still function today; and the Emperor Yu, the ‘great' (2,207 B.C.), a pious mystic and great Adept, is said to have obtained his knowledge from the 'Great Teachers of the Snowy Range' in Si-dzang. 
After Buddha in his indignation had determined to save the world by making known the great Secrets, the Brahmans abridged the texts of the 'Upanishads' without altering a single word, by detaching from the manuscripts the most important parts, containing the last word on the Mystery of Being. Any intelligent reader of the 'Upanishads', as they are today will be able to sense these gaps, just as he can sense similar cuts when reading almost any part of the Bible; and this applies to both the Old and New Testaments. The priceless Bhashyas (or commentaries) on the Esoteric Doctrine of the Brahmans are therefore a dead letter to most of the Hindus, except to the Smartava Brahmans, for they are jealously preserved in their mathams or monasteries. There is only one Sect, founded by Shankārachārya in the 8th century A.D., which is still very powerful in Southern India, which can produce students who have sufficient knowledge to comprehend the dead letter of the commentaries for the reason that only they have occasional real Initiates at the head of their Institutions. 
After an initiated Adept had successfully passed through his various trials he used to be bound to a cross (+), plunged in a deep sleep (the 'Sleep of Siloam' as it is called to this day among the initiates in Asia Minor, in Smyrna, and in Upper Egypt). He remained in this state for three days and nights, during which period his Higher Mind conversed with the ‘Gods', and visited various planes of existence above and below the Earth-plane doing works of charity such as we have mentioned before in our discussion on ‘Meditation', while his body remained in a Temple crypt, cave or labyrinth. During the night of the approaching end of the third day he was carried to the entrance of a gallery (in Egypt to the entrance of the Great Pyramid of Khufu (Cheops), where at a certain hour the beams of the rising Sun struck full on the face of the entranced candidate, who then awoke to be initiated by Osiris and Thoth, the God of Wisdom, if the initiation took place in Egypt. After he was thus awakened the Great Hierophant whispered into his ear the secret Words, ostensibly addressed to the Sun-Osiris, but in reality to the Spirit-Sun within the breast of the Candidate, enlightening the 'new-born' man. 
There is a sacred connection of the Sun with the Cross from the highest antiquity in both its generative and spiritually re-generative capacities. You will find in the tomb of Bait-Oxly, in the reign of Rameses II, crosses in every shape and position, as also on the throne 
of that sovereign, and finally on a fragment representing the adoramos of Bakhan-Aleare, from the Hall of the Ancestors of Tehutimes 111 (Greek 'Tuthmosis' or Thutmose'), now in the National Library of Paris. In this sculpture and painting one sees the disc of the sun beaming upon an ansated Cross placed upon a cross of which those of Calvary are perfect copies. 
The Sun is the symbol for the One and only Perfect God, the Monad, for One was always Good, and Harmony, because no disharmony can proceed from ONE alone. Hence the Latin word Solus in relation to the One and Only God, the Unknown of Paul. Solus, however, very soon became Sol — the Sun — thus reverting inevitably to the original meaning of the symbol, though the real significance was lost once more. 
As an example how even the greatest Scholars can err when they endeavour to explain some of the symbolical figures of mythology, we will quote a paragraph from Decharme's 'Mythologie de la Grèce', in which he says, following the traditions, “Castor and Pollux (the twin brothers, nota bene, — our interjection) are nothing but the Sun and Moon, conceived as twins..... The Sun, the immortal and powerful Being that disappears every evening from the horizon and descends under the earth, as though he would make room for the fraternal orb which comes to life with night, is Pollux who sacrifices himself for Castor; Castor, who, inferior to his brother, owes to him his immortality; for the Moon, says Theophrastus, is only another, but feebler Sun (De Ventis, 17).” 
This is an entirely wrong interpretation; the real meaning lies in the allusion to the so-called 'Egg-born' Third Race of Man; the first half of which is mortal, i.e., unconscious in its Personality, and having nothing within itself to survive (this is Matter); and the latter half of which becomes immortal in its Individuality, by reason of its Higher Mind being called to life by the Informing Gods, and thus connecting it with this Earth. This is Pollux; while Castor represents the personal, mortal man (the lower Mind), an animal of not even a superior kind, when unlinked from the Divine Individuality of the dual Principle of Soul and Higher Mind. 
Thus we arrive at the idea of the 'Twins'; Soul - absolutely Divine and immortal, and never incarnate; Higher Mind - for ever divided from the Soul by death if it does not reach out to its twin brother while still connected with the body, and gives way to the fleshly senses, allowing itself to be attracted by the material to such an extent that it 
denies the spiritual. This is the true Occult meaning, and the war? spread modern interpretation — so celebrated in antiquity, as Plutarch tells us, as symbolical of brotherly devotion — namely, that it was an image of the Sun and Moon borrowed from the spectacle of Nature, is weak and inadequate to explain the secret meaning. Besides the fact that the Moon, with the Greeks, was feminine in exoteric mythology, and could therefore hardly be regarded as Castor, and at the same time be identified with Diana, ancient symbologists who held the Sun, the king of all sidereal Orbs, as the visible image of the Highest Deity, would not have personified it by Pollux, who was a demi-god only. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master 
