SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 40. 

Dear Disciple, 
Thomas Carlyle has said that: “All that mankind has done, thought, gained, or been; it is lying as in magic preservation in the pages of books.” Like so many other sayings, this is only partly true, for the great secrets are not to be found in any book, unless they have been wrapped up in symbolical language which only the initiate can decipher. For this reason Bishop Butler uttered an entirely true dictum, inasmuch as he stated that: “The Bible contains many truths as yet undiscovered.” 
That this is so you will probably have realised when in our previous Lectures we gave you the real interpretation of a few sentences from the Bible - unless you want to be one of those who strictly adhere to the letter that killeth. This is your own prerogative, of course, for as we have stated elsewhere, we will never say that you must accept this or reject that; for it would be against all our principles as regards personal freedom of thinking and acting; a freedom which God himself has granted to all His creatures. 
There may be many future occasions on which we shall take a sentence here and there from the various Holy Books and Teachings and endeavour to throw new light on it; for, after all, we are seeking the Light — are we not? In the study of Occult Science we do not only try to explain chapters, verses or sentences, but it is essential to delve into the different meanings of certain words, and sometimes even parts of words. 
Let us take the word 'Path' once more. In the Rig Veda occurs the following sentence: “The wise guard the home of Nature's order, they assume excellent forms in secret”. In connection with 'Path' we shall first consider the word 'wise'. This is explained in another verse of the same book as follows: "The Seven Wise Ones (which are the seven rays of Wisdom) fashion seven Paths”. Here is a reference to, and an explanation of the word 'Path' which is not apparent on the surface; the hidden meaning is there, nevertheless. By 'Path' is also meant 'Line', and 'Race', the latter of which may be on one of these Paths; never more than one Race on One Path in a strict sense of speaking, although it is of course possible for a number of persons of each Race to be all on different paths, though here again; one person can be on one path only at one time. This is explained in the Rig Veda thus; “To one of these may the distressed mortal come”, and though this verse is commonly interpreted solely from the astronomical and Cosmic aspect, it is one of the most pregnant in Occult meaning. The 'Paths' may mean ‘Beams of Light' too, falling on the Paths leading to Wisdom. Path means also 'Way'. The Paths in the above sentence are, in short, the Seven Rays which fall free from the Macrocosmic Centre, the Seven Principles in the Metaphysical, the Seven Races in the physical sense. 
In the above few sentences we have given you the first hint of the ‘Seven Keys of Wisdom and Enlightenment which we mention in our Manifesto. The real meaning of a word, verse or sentence depends upon the key that is used. 
You will thus see how extremely difficult it is to understand Sacred Teachings without a real guide; not only is it difficult, but it is impossible! The seeker becomes lost in a labyrinth in the same manner as some of the neophytes of the Egyptian Mystery Schools have been lost in the labyrinths beneath certain sacred buildings in Egypt in olden times. They tried to force their way into the arcane crypts — which still exist today and where the Adepts still foregather in council — in order to surprise and master the great secrets before they were ready; the result being that all that remains of those inquisitive and forward neophytes are small heaps of mouldy bones, some of which are still there today. When we refer to these ‘labyrinths' and 'Councils' we speak from experience and not by hearsay; nor will you find these facts in any 'Books', and we are telling you these things under the seal of secrecy. 
In the “Sepher Yetzirah’, or ‘Number of Creation', there is mention made of thirty-two Paths of Wisdom. The whole process of Evolution is given out in numbers; the number three is repeated four times, and the number four, five times. It is taught there that the Wisdom of God is contained in numbers (Sephrim or Sephiroth), for Sepher (or S-ph-r when unvowelled) means 'to cipher'. For this reason Plato states that the Deity ‘geometrizes' in fabricating the Universe. 
Vishnu is described as “Striding through the seven regions of the Universe in three steps”, although we must add that with the Hindus this is an exoteric account, a surface tenet and an allegory, while the Cabalists give it out as the Esoteric and final meaning. When we come to the study of ‘numbers' later on we shall go deeply into these things. At the moment we mention these laws in passing only, and in order to draw your attention to the vast labyrinth of hidden meanings in the arcane writings, stretching in all directions, bewildering and vast, like those which exist in Egypt, where they are not only beneath the sacred buildings, but stretch for miles to all points of the compass, silently below the sands and in utter darkness. 
There is yet another kind of Path, called in Sanskrit the Antahkarana, the internal cause, or the centre through which the Higher Mind may reach the Soul. It has been called an “imaginary bridge between the Divine and the human Egos” (though both are ONE in actuality). 
In the entirely depraved and lowest forms of materialistic natures this 'internal cause can be atrophied completely and destroyed in the end by non-use. This is true, for without it the great chasm which divides the material man from the Divine Realms cannot be crossed. It would be like trying to reach the continent from England without crossing the sea in some way. Once we have made the final crossing to the Realms beyond the Fourth, then we can do without this internal cause, or bridge, for our natures become then completely changed in a way we cannot discuss yet, though we can tell you now that when this change comes about we do not lose our individuality as some Philosophers imagine. Nay – it becomes more brilliant, vital and powerful to such an extent that it is almost indescribable. 
Many people think that 'Nirvana' means a total extinction of the Self, the Ego, the individual; and they are afraid of this, which is not to be wondered at. Let us reassure you if you have been thinking this in the past; it is not true. Nor does the ‘Path' end with the fifth Realm; not so — it stretches forward, upward, outward and inward for all eternity. But it is different from anything you can imagine. Powers hitherto dormant in you — even in the Fourth Realm — are awakened, Mysteries in invisible Nature are unveiled, and every Mystic Word will become known to you as you progress. This is the Path of Deliverance, it becomes impossible to return to voluntary incarnation as a human being on Earth in the form of an Adept, but you may 'overshadow', or appoint, one who is agreeable to this from the Fourth Realm; he then becomes a Teacher and Revealer. 
But there is also a more dreadful Path: that which leads downwards; in Sanskrit it is called the Tala, the nether part. It is a place, state or condition in which the life-forces are reversed; they proceed against, and press against the great spiral Life-wave that makes for the evolution of the higher consciousness. For this reason a Tala indicates a state of rebellion and misery, or, in its most exoteric expression 'Hell’. A Tala and a Loka (which latter is also a place, plane or condition, but of the higher kind) on the same plane have the same density of matter, but the former contains the negative or descending currents of life, and the latter the positive or ascending currents of life; and a Tala-Loka is the nether world. The deeper a being descends into the Talas the more intellectual he may become; at the same time becomes definitely less spiritual. One may also be a morany su person but yet not a spiritual one; such a one will develop spiritual powers in future incarnations. 
A man who dwells in the Higher Realms may still visit one and all of the lower planes; it all depends upon his spiritual powers and on his ability to retain his spiritual attributes in spite of his negative surroundings. In this manner it is possible for the Divine Beings to descend to these lower Realms and bring a message of comfort to those who are as yet almost entirely depraved but not entirely so and therefore lost in the latter case. Thus the higher ones help the lower to ascend once more on the Path to Light, or at any rate they point out the way to it. 
The seeker who is not naturally psychic, though he wishes to rise ‘upwards', should fix his consciousness in a higher plane and nail it there as it were. He should centre on the higher planes, trying hard all the time not to permit his body, or lower mind, and intellect to drag him down again and carry him away. 
Clemens Alexandrinus, that ex-pupil of the Neoplatonic School says: “If there is instruction, you must seek for a Master”. This applies especially to the last mentioned class of person, for he needs a Master most. At the same time Clemens mentions Cleanthes, taught by Zeno; Theophrastus by Aristotle; Metrodorus by Epicurus; Plato by Socrates and so on. But he adds that when he had looked back further to Pythagoras, Pherecydes, and Thales, that he has still to search for their Masters. So his search went on, right back to the Magi themselves, and he said that he would not cease asking to learn who it was that they had for Master. That quest would have gone on for ever, for these great Philosophers and Adepts would never reveal their Masters unless they were given permission to do so, for they all belonged to the Secret Schools. And he argues: “Surely, their Master could be no one of men." 
There is truth in this argument, for the real Master is still under the guidance of a Higher One, back to the Archangels themselves, who also have their Masters. But his real aim was to discover two distinct Masters, one the preceptor of biblical patriarchs, and the other the teacher of the Gentiles. Finally he traced them, and they were, as was to be expected, God and the Devil; for the subject of Clemens's enquiry related to the dual aspect of Hermetic Philosophy, as cause and effect. He comes at last to the conclusion that Magic has two origins, divine and diabolical. He perceives its bifurcation into two channels, or paths,  deduction and inference. This illustrates, in a way, the conditions, states or planes of Tala and Loka. 
Magic — and please remember what we told you about it before - is a dual power. Nothing is easier than to turn any form of Whi Magic into Black Sorcery; an evil thought is enough. So guard not only your actions but your thoughts as well, and this is the reason why we have so much insisted on your concentration on Peace; for Peace is one of the Keys! 
The opposite to it is what Bulwer-Lytton called Vril in his 1871 novel 'The Coming Race'; and it is fortunate that the books on Black Magic, discovered in Numa's tomb should have been burnt; for in these books were full instructions how to make the so-called "Thunderbolts from the Astra’, a kind of magical Bow and Arrow, calculated to destroy in one moment whole multitudes of men. You can find reference to it in the Purānas, the Ramāyāna and elsewhere. Such then, are a few of the dangers of the Left-hand Path, and we pray that you may never contact any of its terrible dangers. 
May the Blessings of the All-Good shield you, now and always. 
Your Hidden Master. 
