SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER 
Grade 1. Number 48. 
Dear Disciple, 
We must now consider the Principles of Vibration and Motion a little and try to discover what they are. In Occultism the Atoms are called vibrations; also Sound — collectively. 
You probably know that the prominent 19th century physicist, John Tyndall (1820 - 1893), traced, on the lower rung of the ladder of monadic being, the whole course of the atmospheric vibrations — and this constitutes the objective part of the process in Nature. He traced and recorded the rapidity of their motion and transmission; the force of their impact; their setting up vibrations in the tympanum and their transmission of these to the otoliths, etc., till the vibration of the auditory nerve commences — and a new phenomenon now takes place; the subjective side of the process, or the sensation of Sound. Did Tyndall perceive or see it? No! For his speciality was to discover the behaviour of Matter. But why should not one who is ‘psychic' see it, one who is a Spiritual Seer, whose inner eye is opened; and one who can see through the veil of matter? 
The waves and undulations of Science are all produced by ATOMS, propelling their molecules, etc., into activity from within, and having their electrons and other parts in a constant state of vibration and motion as well, on account of the power of God's Will which we mentioned before. Atoms of all sorts and sizes (from the tiny 'speck' of matter to the planet, the Kosmos and the Universe, and so on) fill the immensity of Space, and by their continuous vibration are that motion which keeps the wheels of Life going perpetually. It is the inner work that produces the natural phenomenon called the correlation of Force. Only, at the origin of every such 'Force' there stands the conscious guiding Noumenon thereof — Angel of God, Spirit or Demon, ruling powers all of them, yet the same always. 
As described by Seers — those who can see the motion of the interstellar shoals, and follow them clairvoyantly in their evolution - they are dazzling, like specks of virgin snow in radiant Sunlight and in every colour known and unknown. We gave you the clue to this when we mentioned the brilliant specks in the various octaves and overtones of the Sound and Colour Exercises! Their velocity is swifter than thought, quicker than any mortal physical eye can follow, and, as well as can be judged from the tremendous rapidity of their course, the motion is circular. Standing on an open plain, or on a mountain summit especially, and gazing into the vast vault above and the spatial infinitudes around, the whole atmosphere seems ablaze with them, the air soaked through with these brilliant coruscations. At times, the intensity of their motion produces flashes like the Northern Lights in the Aurora Borealis. The sight is so marvellous that, as the second into this inner world, and feels the scintillating points shoot past him, he is filled with awe at the thought of other, still greater mysteries that lie beyond, and within, this radiant ocean. 

The terms 'vibrations and ‘waves' are generally used in a very broad sense by Science, and apply to a large variety of phenomena and processes. The term 'vibration' commonly refers to a to-and-fro motion, which by its meaning has to be extended to include a periodic physical process, such for example, as a cyclic variation in electric or magnetic field intensity. When an elastic body is reformed and released it is in general set into oscillation so that the displacement of any particle from its equilibrium position is a more or less complicated harmonic function in time and rhythm. Harmonic motion is a distinct type of periodic motion, or vibration, characteristic of elastic bodies; illustrated by a birdcage bobbing up and down at the end of a spiral spring, or (approximately) by the piston of a steam engine. It may be either simple with one frequency and amplitude, or made up of two or more simple components, and consequently of more complex character. The essential feature of a simple harmonic motion is that, with its range extending to equal distances on both sides of an equilibrium position or origin, the acceleration is always towards the origin and directly proportional to the distance from it. With elastic vibrations this is easily seen to follow from Hooke's law, since the force tending to restore the deformed body to equilibrium is proportional to the deformation. The motion is called 'harmonic' undoubtedly because the vibrations of bodies emitting musical sounds are of this character. 
It is interesting to note the relationship between harmonic and circular motion. If a peg is inserted in the face of a circular disk or wheel and the latter uniformly rotated, the motion of the peg, as viewed with the wheel seen edgewise, is a simple harmonic. In fact, uniform circular motion is made up of the same period and amplitude at right angles, one being a quarter-period ahead of the other in phase. If the two harmonic components have a phase difference other than a quarter-period, the resultant in general is motion in an ellipse; while if they have unequal periods, the path is one of a class of more or less complicated loci called 'lissajous' curves. 
Not only is it possible to combine two or more simple harmonic motions of different periods, but there are also means of analysing the resultant motion, when the latter is given, to find its component harmonics. For example, if the wave form of such a complex tone as that produced by a bell or a saxophone is accurately graphed by meanto of a phonodeik (which is a device for amplifying wave forms), of an oscilloscope, the equation of the vibratory motion can be deduced m such form as to show the separate components. 
The chief characteristics whereby musical sounds are distinguished from each other and from non-musical sounds are pitch and quality. Pitch is that which the normal ear recognises as corresponding to position in the musical scale. It is dependent primarily upon the frequency of the predominant sound waves; for example, middle C on the piano has a fundamental frequency of about 264 cycles per second. The frequency of a musical tone may be measured by means of a sonometer in comparison with a standard tuning fork. The sonometer string is tuned to unison with the unknown frequency, and then with the fork of known frequency, by varying Its length at constant tension by means of a movable fret; the frequencies are then in the inverse ratio of the lengths. A ‘siren’ may also be used for this purpose; it has a disk with equally spaced holes through which air is blown as the disk is rotated. This gives the frequency by direct count. Microphones and oscilloscopes are now also commonly used for such purposes. 
A vibration may or may not be symmetrical with respect to its neutral position; in any case the maximum displacement is called the amplitude of the vibration. 
If a vibratory disturbance occurs at any point in a medium having sufficient continuity to transmit displacements from one part to another, a train of waves is propagated outward from the seat of the disturbance. The speed of propagation depends upon the closeness between adjacent particles of medium and the consequent magnitude of the restoring forces; and upon whatever reaction of the medium corresponds the mechanical inertia. In some cases also the speed varies with the frequency, as with light in a material medium. 
In applied dynamics vibrations might be classified as natural and artificial. An outstanding example of the former is the earthquake. Almost any rotating machinery furnishes examples of the latter. Civilised man comes into contact with artificial vibrations constantly, but only occasionally with those of a natural type, as far as obvious material conditions are concerned. Sometimes vibrations can be an asset; such as the use of vibrations to jar a pattern loose from moulding sand, vibrations in therapeutical work, and a few others. In the main - material vibration is a nuisance, possibly destructive, indicative of wear and inefficiency, liable to produce weakening of a structure, and fatiguing physically and mentally, Man-made vibrations are much more likely to be encountered in damaging amounts in cities than areas, on account of the considerable amount of machinery "ance about our cities. They carry a high average density of traffic, and further, there are tubes, railways, and a concentration of commercial vehicles which produce all sorts of disturbances on the crust of the earth, within the steel skeletons of modern buildings, and within the nerve centres of man. For this reason there are a great many sensitive persons who find it at times almost impossible to bear the constant destructive vibrations of a city, and this applies especially to those, who, like the Students of The Order, are trying to attune with the finer vibrations of the Universe, of which Science is totally ignorant. Yet, if one can overcome these disturbances of the ether and penetrate their clamour, a great battle is won in respect of the exercise of Will and Self control. The mystic, or Occultist, who overcomes these difficulties is an altogether stronger and better person than the one who crawls weakly into his shell and gives up at the first appearance of an obstacle. Such as the latter will never get anywhere in this incarnation. 
We have stated before that all in Nature is subjected to definite laws. For centuries the belief has existed that the Solar System is not merely an accidental arrangement of objects in Space, but is rather the product of some process of evolution, as Science now reluctantly admits. The mere fact of the common direction of orbital motion of the more than 1,300 planets and asteroids in our Solar System is in itself sufficient evidence against any chance arrangement. The asteroid belt alone (which lies between Mars and Jupiter), is now estimated to contain between 1.1 and 1.9 million asteroids larger than 1 km (0.6 miles) in diameter! A recent Pronunciamento of Science is that in spite of the labours of the large number of eminent scientists and philosophers (?) who have worked on the 'problem' during the past three centuries, the origin of the Solar System is by no means completely understood. 
We heartily agree with this admission; half-hearted as it is. Not only is it “not completely” understood by Science....it is not understood at all!! Science sneers at the writings of Thomas Wright, Swedenborg and Kant, regarding their theories as "pure hypotheses which violate many of the fundamental principles of dynamics”, and it goes on to say that "these gentlemen had not much scientific training, and therefore their theories can be disregarded”. Yet, in spite of this lack of "scientific training" the above named “un-scientific gentlemen” have come very close to the Ancient Occult Scientific WISDOM. 
But is this “scientific training” leading Science to any better and more lasting understanding than the mere “hypotheses” of some of the great thinkers of the last centuries? How utterly ignorant Science is about one of the commonest facts of Nature — the 'heat' of the Sun – can be gathered from the following 'scientific' facts. 
Newton, one of the first investigators of this problem, tried to determine it, and after him all the scientists who have been occupied with calorimetry have followed his example. All have believed themselves successful, and have formulated their results with great confidence. Here are, in chronological order of the publication of the results, the temperatures (in degrees centigrade) found by each of them. 
Newton  1,699,300 Pouillet 1,461 Tollner 102,200 Secchi 5,344,840 Bricson 2,726,700 Fizeau 7,500 Waterson 9,000,000 Spoeren 27,000 Deville 9,500 Soret 5,801,846 Vicaire 1,500 Rosetti 20,000 
The difference is as 1,461 against 9,000,000, or no less than about 8,998,600°C!!! There probably does not exist in 'Science a more astonishing contradiction than that revealed in these figures. 
Science says it now possesses infallible computers, satellites, orbiting telescopes and techniques the like of which could barely have been visualised when this Lecture was first written more than 60 years ago. It therefore assumes that its current findings are correct. Dear Student, do not be deluded by ‘modern'data. New theories and measurements are continually forthcoming; each of which is regarded as equally 'accurate' until they are quietly discarded! Science does not yet understand the true nature of the Sun: we doubt it ever will. 
To conclude this Lecture we think it might be intercouri you some of the more recent calculations produced during odd years. (Please note that 'K' refers to units of the Kelvin Scale of temperature wherein measurements commence from absolute zero. Since 1967 'Kelvins' have been expressed simply as 'K). 
In 1965, we extract from the chapter on 'The Sun' found in Space Science', written by J. C. Lindsay, W. M. Neupert and R. G. Stone (who were all authorities and on the staff of the Goddard Space Flight Centre, Maryland, under the American National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)); they said: “The source of the Sun's energy lies deep within the interior. Theoreticians estimate the central temperature to be between 15 - 20,000,000 K. The effective temperature over the solar disk is 5,750 K. The lower chromosphere has temperatures of 4,000 K - 5,000 K, and the higher layers of chromosphere indicate temperatures in the order of 20,000 K." 
The 1965 edition of ‘Energy' published by Time-Life International, shows the Sun's interior as having a temperature of 10,000,000 K; while in 1967 the eminent English Scientist, Professor Sir Bernard Lovell, quoted a figure of 100,000 K!! 
Nowadays it becomes a more complex task to compare the various computations owing to the fact that Science has delineated and divided the Solar Sphere into distinct layers or regions, viz: the core, the interior, convective zone, photosphere or visible surface, the chromosphere, and the corona. Should you observe that scientific pronouncements are becoming more uniform, then there is little wonder in that. Modern techniques demand that international teams of Scientists work side by side on the same vast projects — and naturally reach similar conclusions; a consensus that has immeasurably increased since the advent of the Internet. However, this does not imply that their determinations are any more correct. 
By 1975, having studied the latest information received from satellites, Science had come to the conclusion that perhaps the Sun possesses a different structure from that previously envisaged. In feature articles published in that year ‘Scientific American' quoted the solar corona as being 1,000,000 K; while 'New Scientist' said it was 2,000,000 K. 
In 1980, the eminent American astronomer, Carl Sagan said: “The temperature at the core is an incredible 15,000,000 K; while in 1994 the Concise Columbia Electronic Encyclopædia stated: “The temperature of the core is 20,000,000 K. Even as we reprint this Lecture in 2010, NASA state: “The temperature of the solar surface is about 5,800 K, whilst temperatures in the sun's core reach over 15 million K.” 
Thus it will be seen that the current position still appears to be very uncertain as far as 'Science' is concerned. But if any Occult Scientist would make public the real facts, "Science' would protest vehemently in the name of EXACT (???) Science! 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
NOTE: When this Lecture was previously updated in 1980, certain Scientists announced the discovery (to them) of a hitherto undetected feature of the Sun. They found that the surface of the Sun oscillates, thus distorting its shape. This phenomena, now dubbed 'Helioseismology by Science, has also been detected in distant stars. Other Scientists have not been slow to point out that if this observation is correct, it would then be necessary to completely reconstruct all previous concepts regarding the structure of the Sun, probably including a drastic revision of its estimated temperature! 
