SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 41. 
Dear Disciple, 
There is nothing in this objective and illusive world of ours that cannot be made to serve two purposes – good or bad, and as Shakespeare observes: "It is for us to choose our Paths, no one else can do it for us." 
Chandrakīrti (Dava Dagpa) who wrote the commentaries on the Prasanga doctrines and taught publicly, states that there are two ways of ascending the Path to Nirvana. Any virtuous man can enter upon it by meditation or self-perception, which may lead to the intuitive comprehension of the Four Truths (about which more later), without belonging either to a monastic order or having been initiated. But in this case it was considered as a heresy to maintain that the visions which may arrive in consequence of such meditations, or by 'internal knowledge' are not susceptible of errors by means of false visions - for they are. The manifestation of God known as "The Soul of the World', the Divine Essence which pervades, permeates, animates and informs all things, called Anima Mundi (which is also the Self of a progressed Adept), that alone, having an absolute and eternal existence, can have absolute knowledge. Even the Initiate, going about in full awareness in the astral body, under the influence of terrestrial attributes, however spiritualised, may commit an occasional error in accepting the false for the true in his explorations of the World of Spirit (as it is wrongly called — for the three Realms above the Earth-plane are only spiritualised, more or less, MATTER). 
Only when he has risen above or beyond the Fourth Realm (which is – we remind you again – still material, though completely spiritualised and beyond decay or change), and he is then without any vestige of the material, or 'without remains', as it is termed sometimes, the Perfect Initiate as he then is, can err no longer, for he dwells in Truth and is Truth in every sense of the word. There have been, and are, great Adepts who could separate their Higher Minds entirely from both the human and the astral body, but these great beings are so rare that they cannot be placed in the same category as the rest of the Initiates, or other highly spiritualised men. 
We have been asked very often if women can become initiates too. Your Masters on their part ask: why not? Although the male principles are supposed to represent the spiritual and positive aspects of the universe, and the female the material and negative, we must never forget that woman is one-half of the total human form, which is male-female when complete. In connection with this it is interesting to note that formerly in pre-Communist China when a Chinese gentleman asked for the hand in marriage of the lady of his choice, he stated that he wanted to complete himself. For this reason we state that if a man can spiritualise his Higher Mind (which is the negative part of the Soul) to such an extent that it becomes the equal of the Soul, we see no cause to deny a woman the same ability and privilege; for she has a Higher Mind and Soul as well as a man, and is his equal in every way, and often his superior in many ways! 
There is yet another kind of Path indicated (though closely connected with that which has gone before in our present Lectures) in the epithet for Buddha, which is the Sanskrit term Tathagāta (literally: ‘of such nature'), meaning 'He who follows in the footsteps of his Predecessors in Enlightenment'. But even such a great sage as Buddha can reach his divine state only in the same way as any other Adept, through a long course of study, meditations, initiations, and he cannot miss any one rung of the ladder up to the arduous 'Path of Perfection'. Only by personal effort and merit, often accompanied by intense suffering, can the goal be reached. 
Mental or intellectual gifts and abstract knowledge follow an Initiate from birth to birth, but he must acquire phenomenal powers anew in each incarnation, passing through all the successive stages without faltering, no matter what his trials be. During the period of meditation, no worldly phenomena on the physical plane must be allowed to enter into his mind across his thoughts; and religious abstract meditation will develop in him most powerful faculties independently of himself. By 'raising his thoughts he enters into a state of ecstasy, and all the Realms above and below open out to his spiritual vision. He can behold the SPLENDOUR or the Darkness at will, and dwell among the inhabitants of either, gaining Glory from the Higher Realms and shedding compassion on the lower. He can be on both Paths at once if he lists, yet has the left-hand one no terrors from which he shrinks, nor does he fail to attune with the Beings and conditions of the Right-hand Path. When he has attained thus far he is already an Initiated Master, comprehending ALL in the SECRECY of his POWER and PEACE!! He has acquired the absolute comprehension of Being and non-being, the changeless TRUE EXISTENCE in Spirit, although it may seem to the blind among men, who are dazzled by their own non-comprehension of Truth that he is still ‘in the body'. When he reaches out to the Higher Planes above the Earth he knows every inhabitant thereof as being in a state of Non-ego, because each has become the PERFECT EGO. To the dwellers on the planes below they might seem to be non-existent if such dwellers could project their 'sight' to those Higher Planes, but that seeming voidness is ‘self-existent and perfect, because they have become absolute; the unreal is transformed into conditions of true Reality – which is Actuality — and not a realisation of the senses in the lower self. And the 'realities' of Earth, or the three planes above, have vanished into non-existing air, being ILLUSIONS. 
The Absolute Truth has conquered the relative Truth, and the dwellers in those divine spheres of mystery have reached the state of ‘self-analysing reflection', which is that absolute consciousness of the personal merged in the impersonal Ego, which soars above all human comprehension: for it is beyond all illusion — yet these vibrant PERSONALITIES are not ‘formless Breaths', as has been taught by some thinkers; nay, they have BEING, POWER, FLAME; they are flames of the Great Fire of God, mingling with its ineffable BLISS, radiant in their happiness. They have done with our Path, and commenced upon their own which is yet but a continuation of the Sun-Path! 
And now — having arrived at these Divine Realms by means of our studies on the Path of the Moon, what about the Sun-Path? It will be clear to you that the Path to the Sun is that which lies in the opposite direction to the Path of the Moon. But because we have reached the Light of the sunny plains by talking about the Moon it does not mean that the Sun-Path leads to Darkness! No! We have but turned away from the Moon-Path and sought the Higher Worlds by intuition and attunement, as it were; although the discerning ones among you all will have perceived our drift. 
But having said so much about the Moon with such happy results we must consider the Sun for a little while as well; for we said in Lecture 26 that we should discuss both in the coming Lectures. And not only do we keep our promises, but it is essential that we should consider our Golden Source of Light and Life from the Occult point of view, so that in later studies we shall know what we are discussing when we mention these great Principles of Sun and Moon again in their higher aspects. 
Astronomically the Sun is the 'Most High', and the 'Lord' is one of His Seven Planets, whether it be lao, the Genius of the Moon, or Ildabaoth-Jehovah, the Genius of Saturn, according to Origen and the Egyptian Gnostics. With the latter it was Thoth, or Hermes, who was the chief of the Seven, as you may read in 'The Book of the Dead'. Let the 'Angel Gabriel', the 'Lord' of Iran, watch over His people, and Michael-Jehovah over His Hebrews. These are not the Gods of other nations, nor were they ever those of Jesus. As each Persian Dev is chained to his planet (see Origen's copy of the Chart or Diagrams of the Ophites, in the 'Contra Celsum'), so each Hindu Deva (a ‘Lord') has its allotted portion, a world, a planet, a nation or a race. Plurality of worlds (or planets) implies plurality of Gods. 
Pythagoras, and after him Philo Judæus, held the number 12 as very sacred. This had to do with the Zodiac, and the twelve sons of Jacob refer to the same, as Villapandus points out in his 'Temple de Jerusalem'. Sir James Malcolm, in his ‘History of Persia', shows the Dabistan echoing all sorts of traditions about the Zodiac. He traces the invention of it to the palmy days of the golden age of Iran, remarking that one of the said traditions maintains that the Genii of the Planets are represented under the same shapes and figures they had assumed when they showed themselves to several holy Prophets, and thus led to the establishment of the rites based on the Zodiac. 
The number 12 is a perfect number for the reason that it is the same as that of the signs of the Zodiac, which the Sun visits in twelve months, and it is to honour that number that Moses divided his nation in twelve tribes, established the twelve cakes of shew-bread, and placed twelve precious stones upon the breastplate of the pontiffs. According to Seneca, Berosus taught prophecy of every future event and cataclysm by the Zodiac; and the times fixed by him for the conflagration of the world, and for a Deluge, are found to answer the times given in an ancient Egyptian papyrus. Such a catastrophe comes at every renewal of the cycle of the sidereal year of 25,868 years. The Sun is the symbol of the sacred Fire whence all has sprung into being. 
As Nārada shows in the Anugītā: “The smoke of that fire, which is of excellent glory, appears in the shape of darkness; its ashes (are) passions; and — goodness is that in connection with it, in which the offering is thrown”. That is to say, that faculty in the disciple which apprehends the subtle truth (the flame) which escapes heavenward, while the objective sacrifice remains as a proof and evidence of piety only to the profane. Nārada says also: "Day and night are a pair, between them is the fire.... That which exists and that which does not exist are a pair, between them is the fire...." The 'fire' in these allegories means both the 'SELF' and the Higher Divine knowledge. 
When we mention the seven-fold man, or the seven Principles of man we should add that these are seeing, feeling, smelling, tasting, hearing (making up the senses of the lower mind or body), the Higher Mind and Understanding; these are called the seven tongues of fire, making up the Flame of Life, either in the human or the astral body. Man is thus a Son of the Sun in the astronomical and cosmical meaning; but in psycho-metaphysical symbolism the Flame is the Self in the sense of non-separateness from the Greater Flame; therefore both Divine and Human. For this reason the Path to the Sun is nothing but the way home, after the exile has completed his long journey. 
Apollo, is Helios, the Sun, Phoibos-Apollo, the “Light of Life and of the World,” who arises out of the Golden-winged Cup (the Sun). Such is the Grecian Sun-God, but the Sun, as humans know it, is only the Life and Light of the material, physical world, the delight of the senses — not of the Soul. When we speak of the 'Path of the Sun', we are not imagining that we shall laboriously climb up along one of its beams and walk along for untold miles until we reach the Sun we see shining in the sky; for that Sun is only a reflection of the true — and Hidden Sun. 
On the contrary; the expressions 'Path of the Sun', and 'Path of the Moon', must be taken in a symbolical sense, and this applies also to the ‘dwelling' in either of these Regions. 
In order to make all this clear, in good time we shall continue our discussions on these great subjects – especially on the Sun – in our forthcoming Lectures. 
May the Light of the True Sun bless you all. 
Your Hidden Master. 
