SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER 
Grade 1. Number 47. 
Dear Disciple, 
There are seven nervous plexuses in man which secretly intercommunicate with each other by means of the Force which has been (erroneously) called 'Astral Light', 'Imagination of Nature', and so on; the reason for the avoidance of its true term also being that this particular 'Force' (which is a primordial substance or principle), may not be named except amongst the highest Adepts. From this Force or Essence sympathy and antipathy are born; from it we have our dreams; and from it, or by means of it, we have the phenomena of second sight, and extraterrestrial visions. We may call it Light, exoterically, and Lux Esoterically, and it is the body of the Sublime Spirits of the Higher Realms, and their very Essence. Our physical Light is the manifestation of that substance on our earth-plane; it is the reflected radiance of the Divine Light, emanating from the collective 'Body' of those who are called the ‘Lights', and the 'Flames'. This Essence then, or Substance, flows along our nerves, connecting up the nervous centres, and sending messages, impulses, thoughts and feelings along the nerves from one centre to another, or to all at the same time. 
One of the greatest physiologists of the 19th century, Professor Beale, said: “There is a mystery in life — a mystery which has never been fathomed, and which appears greater, the more deeply the phenomena of life are studied and contemplated. In living centres — far more central than the centres seen by the highest magnifying powers, in centres of living matter, where the eye cannot penetrate, but towards which the understanding may tend — proceed changes of the nature of which the most advanced physicists and chemists fail to afford us the conception; nor is there the slightest reason to think that the nature of these changes will ever be ascertained by physical investigation, inasmuch as they are certainly of an order of nature totally distinct from that to which any other phenomena known to us can be relegated”. 
This mystery, or the origin of the Life-Essence, Occultism locates in the same Centre as the nucleus of First Matter of our Solar System, for they are ONE. 
In the Ancient Teachings it is told that: “The Sun is the heart of the Solar System and its brain is hidden behind the visible Sun. Thence, sensation is radiated into every nerve-centre of the great body, and the waves of the Life-Essence flow into each artery and vein". 
Occult Philosophy denies that the Sun is a Globe in combustion, but defines it simply as a world, a glowing Sphere, the real Sun being 
hidden behind, and the visible Sun being only its reflection or shell. So it is with the human body; it is but the reflection or shell O ne (materially on earth) hidden Soul. The Soul is the source from which flow into the body all the higher sensations, for the Soul is in direct contact with that Higher and Hidden Source from which flows all Life and Inspiration; and no matter how magnificently that inspiration manifests in the works of the man of genius, it is but a feeble and earthly reflection of the wonders beyond the four lower material (and Divine) Planes. We have only to remember that even the Glory of the Fourth Realm is indescribable to know that this must be true in a still greater sense of the Realms above, and beyond or within. 
That great Force, manifesting in gross matter, is in the mineral the latent Spark; in the plant that vital and intelligent medium which informs the seed and develops it into the blade of grass, the root, the tree. It is the germ which becomes the outermost expression, or personality of the Spirit, the life, or the consciousness; the vehicle through which these manifest, and by which they are limited in its seven principles, shooting them out as the ‘being' grows and develops. In every animal it does the same; it is the Life-Principle and vital Power; its instinct and its qualities; its characteristics and special idiosyncrasies. To man it gives all these things too, but in addition develops the reflection of its seven times seven 'Fires' within him; each of its seven Principles being an heir in full to, and partaker of, the seven Principles of the Great Mother, or Prima Materia. 
The Breath of its first Principle is Spirit, the Soul; the second is Higher Mind; the third brain and lower Mind, or Mind on the physical Plane, which moves and acts according to the capacities and control of the Higher Mind, led by the Soul, its Divine Positive counterpart. This Force is that which guides the Cosmic and Terrestrial elements. It resides in the Fire, provoked out of its latent into active being; for the whole of the seven sub-divisions of that Principle reside in the terrestrial fire. It whirls in the breeze, blows with the hurricane, and sets the air in motion, which latter element participates in one of its Principles also. Proceeding cyclically, it regulates the motion of the water, attracts and repels the waves, producing RHYTHM in everything, from the heartbeat to the mighty ocean; and it attracts according to fixed Laws, of which its seventh Principle is the informing Higher Mind. It is the informing Spirit of the whole Cosmic Solar Body from a mystic point of view. Its Four Higher Principles contain the germ that develops into the Cosmic Gods; its three lower ones breed the lives of the Elemental forces, or the Elementals. In our Solar world, the One Existence is Heaven and Earth, the Root and the 
Flower, the Action and the Thought. It is in the Sun, and is as present in the glow-worm. Not an atom can escape it. Therefore, the Ancien Sages have wisely called it the Manifested God in Nature. 
There are six primary forces in Nature, synthesised by the seventh; they are the following: 
(1). The great or supreme Force or Power, which is and includes the powers of Light and Heat. 
(2). The Power of Intellect, or real Wisdom or Knowledge. It has two aspects: 
(a) The power of the Mind in interpreting our sensations. 
(b) Its power in recalling past ideas (memory) and raising 
future expectation. 
(c) Its power as exhibited in what are called by 
psychologists “the laws of association”, which enables it to perform persisting connections between various groups of sensations and possibilities of sensations, and thus generate the notion or idea of an external object. 
(d) Its power in connecting our ideas together by the mysterious link of memory, and thus generating the notion of Self or Individuality. 
The above manifestations are those which are produced when this power is placed under the influence or control of material conditions. 
ii. The following are some of its manifestations when liberated from the bonds of matter: 
(a) Clairvoyance. 
(b) Psychometry. 
(3) The power of the Will. Its most ordinary manifestation is the generation of certain nerve currents, which sets in motion such muscles as are required for the accomplishment of the desired object. 
(4) The mysterious power of thought which enables it to produce external, perceptible, phenomenal results by its own inherent energy. The Ancients held that any idea will manifest externally if one's attention is deeply concentrated upon it. Similarly an intense volition will be followed by the desired result. A Yogi generally performs his wonders by means of principles 3 and 4. (The subject of 'thought' will be discussed further in Grade 2.) 
(5) The power or force which moves in a serpentine or curved path. It is the Universal life-principle which manifests everywhere in Nature. This force includes the two great forces of attraction and repulsion. Electricity and magnetism are but manifestations of it. This is the power which brings about that continuous adjustment of external relations to internal relations which is the basis of transmigration of souls (Higher Minds of course), or rebirth, in the doctrines of the Ancient Hindu philosophers. But you will understand that by 'transmigration' we mean reincarnation from one human body to another, after an interval. The human Higher Mind cannot descend into lower forms of life or body, such as are represented by animals or insects, etc. A Yogi must thoroughly subjugate this power or force before he attains release. 
(6). Literally the force or power of letters, speech or music. The whole of the ancient religious or philosophical system in the Sanskrit Scripture has this force or power in all its manifestations for its subject matter. The influence of music is one of its ordinary manifestations. The Power of the mirific ineffable Name is the Crown of this Force. 
Modern Science has but partly investigated the first, second and fifth of the Forces or Powers mentioned above, but it is altogether in the dark as regards the remaining powers. The six forces are in their unity represented by the Astral Light, the seventh, the Light of the Logos. 
In the words of Vishnu Purāna, “The first Creation was that of Mahat, or Intellect. The second was that of the Rudimental Principles. 
The third was — the creation of the senses”; so in this one, the order of Elemental Forces stands thus: 
(1) The nascent Centres of Force, intellectual and physical. 
(2) The Rudimentary Principles, nerve Force, so to say. 
(3) Nascent Apperception, which is the mind of the lower kingdoms, and is especially developed in the third order of Elementals; these are succeeded “by the objective kingdom of minerals, in which this ‘apperception' is entirely latent (or almost so), to re-develop only in the plant. Similarly we might also regard the Seven Planets as the nerve centres of the Solar System. 
But we must never lose sight of the fact that all sensations, or impressions of any kind made upon the brain by means of the nerves are 'substantial' only in the usual sense of the word — for we live in a Realm of Illusion, and what seems real to us here is not actual; therefore realisations of the senses have no basis in actuality, unless we consider all such realisations as reflections; which they are. And this holds good for the first four Higher Realms, of which the Earth is the lowest. 

May the veils of Reality be parted for you so that you will behold Actuality 
Your Hidden Master. 
N.B. This Lecture is the end of another step, and if you wish to write to us we shall be glad to hear from you. 
