SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER 
Grade 1. Number 44. 
Dear Disciple, 
The ambient and all-penetrating fluid (which is in reality but one Ray detached from the Central, Spiritual and Hidden Sun's splendour), this electromagnetic Ether, this vital and luminous caloric, is represented on ancient monuments by the girdle of Isis (see picture at right), which turns round two poles; and in ancient theogonies by the Serpent devouring its own tail, an emblem of prudence, of Saturn, of infinity, immortality and of Cronus - 1 Time — not the God Saturn or the Planet. It is the winged dragon of Medea, the double serpent of the Caduceus, and the tempter of Genesis; but it is also the brazen snake of Moses encircling the Tau, and it is the devil of exoteric dogmatism, while at the same time it is the force which the Higher Mind must conquer, in order to detach itself from the chains of Earth and the two Higher Realms beyond; for if it fails to do so it will be absorbed by the same power, which first produced it, and it will return to either the ‘Moon' Region or to the central and Eternal Fire whence it was first taken to be placed within the material. 
The Great Magical Agent then, that invisible caloric, is the first emanation of the Life-principle in the inner centre of our Universe and the second in the outer manifestation, and the Sun itself is the third form of it, for the Sun is only the Reflection and the material Shadow of the Central Sun of Truth which illuminates the invisible world of spirit in its higher aspects, while the visible Sun is the illuminator of the intellectual world, and is but a gleam borrowed from the Absolute, and it also illuminates the Fourth Realm wholly and the Third Realm partially, but in an entirely different manner from the way it illuminates the Earth Plane. 
The Cosmos is worked and guided from within outwards. We witness this in Man, for every external motion, whether voluntary or mechanical, organic or mental, is produced and preceded by internal feeling or emotion, will or volition, and thought or mind. The whole of the Solar System is controlled and animated by almost endless series of Hierarchies of sentient Beings, each having to perform his own particular mission, and who may be called messengers, if you like, or even Angels at times, but only in the sense that they are agents of Cosmic Laws. Among them is an infinite variation in their respective degrees of consciousness and intelligence — just as in man — and to designate them all as pure Spirits without any earthly alloy is but poetical fancy. They may be, in their lower forms, incipient men, or in their higher, perfected men, for each of them either was, or prepares to become, a man, if not in the present World-Cycle, then in a future one. The lower kind are entirely devoid of what we understand by feeling, or emotion; but the higher kinds – who have passed through all their manifold cycles of incarnations as men – have emotion of a highly refined and etherealised nature; if we may put it thus crudely. They are less influenced by Illusion than men on Earth, or than the 'spirits' of evolved men in the three Realms beyond and above the Earth Plane. 
The incipient entities, elementals, or by whatever name they may be known, have no sense of Ego-ism or personality, never having had terrestrial bodies. They do not say as a man does 'I am myself and no one else; and they are not conscious of separateness. The only Individuality there is under such conditions rests in their respective Hierarchies, and not in their units: and these characteristics vary only with the degree of the Plane to which these Hierarchies belong. The nearer to the region of Homogeneity and the One Divine, the purer and the less accentuated is that individuality in the Hierarchy. They are finite in all respects, with the exception of their higher Principles, namely — the immortal Sparks reflecting the Universal Divine Flame, individualised and separated on the spheres of Illusion, by a differentiation as illusive as the rest. They are 'living' because they are streams projected on the Cosmic Screen of Illusion from the Absolute Life; Beings in whom life cannot become extinct. Having sprung into being under the quickening influence of the uncreated Beam, the reflection of the great Central Sun that radiates on the shores of the River of life, it is the inner principle in them which belongs to the Waters of Immortality, while its differentiated clothing is as perishable as Man's body. For this reason Young was correct when he said that: “Angels are men of a superior kind." 
As we said before: “There are seven Rays”, and we add that a man can belong to but one of them in the sense that he is guided, overshadowed and inspired by the great Beings who are in activity on that same Ray, and all on such a Ray belong to the same Planetary Realm or to a higher plane whence that Ray manifests. Every class of Beings has its own bond of spiritual communion which knits them together - spiritually. And T. Subba Row, who knew this Law, said in his review of Mabel Collins' 'Idyll of the White Lotus' that: “The only possible and effectual way of entering into such brotherhood - is by bringing oneself within the influence of the spiritual Light which radiates from one's own Logos — such communion is only possible between persons whose souls derive their life and sustenance from the same divine Ray, and that, as seven distinct Rays radiate from the "Central Spiritual Sun', all Adepts are divisible into seven classes." 
The closer the approach to one's 'Prototype' in 'Heaven', the better for the mortal whose Personality was chosen, by his own personal Deity (the Seventh Principle), as its terrestrial abode; for with every effort of will toward purification and unity with that 'Self-God'— as it has been called — one of the lower Rays releases its hold, and the spiritual entity of man is drawn higher and ever higher to the Ray that supercedes the first material one, until the inner man is drawn into the one and highest Beam of the Parent-Sun. But do not confuse the Seven Sons of Light in control of such Rays with the Planets after which they are named, as is done by the un-initiated, for these “seven' are, according to the Occult Teachings, our heavenly Parents, or synthetically our Father'. 
Fire is the Root of everything, and the Spirit, beyond manifested Nature, is the Fiery Breath in its absolute Unity. 
In the Manifested Universe it is the Central Spiritual Sun, the electric Fire of all Life. In our Kosmos it is the visible Sun, the spirit of Nature, the terrestrial God. And in, on, and around the Earth, the fiery Spirit thereof — Air, fluidic Fire; Water, liquid Fire; Earth, solid Fire. All is Fire — Ignus, in its ultimate constitution, or 1, the root of which is 0 (nought) in our conceptions, the All in Nature, and its Mind. 
'Pro-Metor' is Divine Fire. It is the Creator, the Destroyer, the Preserver. The primitive names of the Gods are all connected with Fire, from Agni, the Aryan, to the Jewish God, who is a 'consuming Fire'. In India, God is called in various dialects, Eashoor, Esur, Irwur and Ishvara in Sanskrit, the Lord, from Isha, but this is primarily the name of Shiva, the Destroyer, and the three chief Vedic Gods are Agni (Ignis), Vāyu, and Sūrya - Fire, Air and the Sun, three Occult degrees of Fire. In the Hebrew, Aza means to 'illuminate', and Asha is 'Fire'. In Occultism, to 'kindle a fire' is synonymous to evoking one of the three great Fire-Powers, or to 'call on God'. In Sanskrit the root Ush is fire or heat; and the Egyptian word Osiris is compounded, as shown by Schelling, of the two primitive Aish and Asr, or a 'fire-enchanter'. Assar in the old Etruscan meant a God, being perhaps derived from Asura (the supreme spirit, and the same as the Ahura of the Zoroastrians) of the Vedas. 
Esoteric Philosophy maintains that during the Sandhyas (Twilights) the Central Sun emits creative Light - passively, so to say. Causality is latent. It is only during the active periods of Being that it gives rise to a stream of ceaseless Energy, whose vibrating currents acquire more activity and potency with every rung of the hebdomadic ladder of Being which they descend. Hence it becomes comprehensible how the process of 'creating', or rather fashioning, the organic Universe, with all its units of the seven kingdoms, necessitates intelligent Beings — who became collectively a Being or Creative God, differentiated already from the One Absolute Unity, unrelated as the latter is to conditioned ‘Creation' – out of pre-existent eternal Substance, or Matter, which Substance, according to our Teachings, is Boundless, Ever-existing Space. 
To the Kabalists the Central Sun was a Centre of rest, the centre to which all motion was ultimately referred. Round this Central Sun, the first of three systemic Suns revolved on a polar plane, the second on an equatorial plane, and the third only was our visible Sun. These four Solar Bodies were the organs on whose action what man calls creation, the evolution of life on the plane of Earth, depends. The channels through which the influence of these bodies was conveyed to the Earth they held to be electrical. The radiant energy flowing from the Central Sun called the Earth into being as a watery globe, whose tendency as the nucleus of a planetary body, was to rush to the Central Sun within the spheres of whose attraction it had been created. But the radiant energy, similarly electrifying both, withheld the one from the other, and so changed motion towards into motion round the centre of attraction, which the Earth thus sought to reach. 
In the organic cell (the atom) the visible sun found its own proper matrix (by atom we naturally mean the Earth in this instance), finally placing man at its head, in whom, through the animating action of that kingdom, it originated the psychic cell (so-called). But the man so placed at the head of the animal kingdom, at the head of the creation, was the animal, soulless, the perishable man. Hence man, although apparently its crown, would, by his advent have marked the close of a creation; since creation, culminating in him, would at his death have entered on its decline. 
The 'Central Sun' of the occultists even science is obliged to accept astronomically, for it cannot deny the presence in siderial space of a central body in the Milky Way, a point unseen and mysterious, the ever-hidden centre of attraction of our Sun and system. 
But this 'Sun' is viewed differently by the Occultists of the East. While the Western and Jewish Kabalists – and even some pious modern astronomers - claim that in this Sun the God-head is specially present, referring to it the volitional acts of God - the Eastern Initiates maintain that, as the Supra-Divine Essence of the Unknown Absolute is equally in every domain and place, the 'Central Sun' is simply the Centre of Universal Life — Electricity; the reservoir within which that Divine Radiance, already differentiated at the beginning of every ‘Creation', is focussed. Though still in a neutral condition, it is, nevertheless, the one attracting, as also the ever-emitting Life-Centre. 
But the Kabalistic view, quoted above, shows an almost perfect identity in spirit with the Eastern Doctrine. Explain or complete the Teaching of the Seven Suns with the Seven Systems of Planes of Being, of which the 'Suns' are the central bodies, and you have the seven Angelic Planes, whose 'Host' collectively are the Gods thereof..... They are the Head Groups divided into two classes, from the incorporeal down to the semi-corporeal. These classes are directly connected – though in very different ways as regards voluntary connections and functions — with our mankind. They are three, synthesized by the fourth, the first and highest, which is called the Central Sun in the Kabalistic Doctrine. This is the great difference between the Semitic and Aryan Cosmogony - one materialising, humanises the mysteries of Nature; the other spiritualises Matter, and its physiology is always made subservient to metaphysics. Thus, though the seventh ‘Principle' reaches man through all the phases of being, pure as an indiscrete element and an impersonal Unity, it passes through, while the Kabalist teaches from the Central Spiritual Sun and Group the Second, the Polar Sun, which two radiate on man his supreme Soul. Group Three, the Equatorial Sun, cements the Higher Mind to the Soul and the higher attributes of the Mind; while Group Four, the Spirit of our visible Sun, endows him with the lower Mind and its vehicle, or body of senses and passions, the two elements of 'I-making' which evolve individualised consciousness. 
Finally, it is the Spirit of the Earth, in its triple unity that supplies the materials for the physical body, attracting to it the spirits of life and forming the etheric double, or astral body, called the Linga-Sharīra. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
