SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER 
Grade 1. Number 45. 
Dear Disciple, 
Thomas à Kempis has said: “Thou wilt always rejoice in the evening, if thou spend the day profitably," and what can be more profitable than studying the true history of man and the Universe in the manner that we — your Teachers and yourself — are attending on these mysteries? We have often mentioned the 'Ancient Traditions', especially those contained within the sacred books and the Mythologies. The only reason why people do not believe in such writings, traditions and teachings is that they no longer know how to interpret them. In this First Grade we have shown you, to some small extent already, how difficult it is to understand all these things, even when their manifold meanings are made clear to you. We do not indulge in vain speculations, as we have said before, but we teach Occult Science, and Science, in its very nature, can never be easy. We have to learn them by rote by means of our memory. We expect our Students to do this, in order that they may reap the greatest possible amount of benefit from these studies. 
Occult Science is truly a labyrinth in which the explorer is hopelessly lost without a guide. Consider for a moment the various meanings of the symbolism of the Sun and Moon alone. In order to understand it our Students must take careful note of the many seeming contradictions within the explanations of these two great symbols. But in time each will fall into its proper place, such as some of the explanations referring to the Sun, Moon and the atoms, for instance, and that which endows them with form, movement, life and consciousness. If you have studied our previous lectures (and we have no doubt at all that you have) you will have discovered some of these principles in connection with the atom, especially in the more recent Lectures. Let us hope that you have now an entirely different view of life and spirit from that which you entertained before: and that, moreover, you have recognised some of the Divine Truths in regard to these Holy Principles and Conditions. 
We are, in truth, all 'Beni Shamash', or Children of the Sun, in a far more minutely detailed manner than it is possible to realise from the mere reading, for instance, of the ‘Book of Enoch', or the more recent 'Revelation' of St. John. This does not mean that we are 'Sun' or 'Fire' worshippers, Pagans, Heathens or Unbelievers in the divine Message of Jesus the Christ, or in the Divine Messages of the great Teachers of previous or subsequent times. No! We are trying to bring to these Teachings and Messages a better understanding of that which is hidden within them. For none of the great Messengers gave out to the masses that which only the few could understand. This is the principal reason why there have been so many different readings of the Holy Scriptures, leading to the formation of thousands of Christian Sects, all swearing that they alone — and none other — have the Truth, and all of the Truth, and that the rest of mankind, dwelling in dire ignorance, must inevitably go to HELL!! 
The real Truth is so stupendous, however, that none of them have it, or could assimilate it mentally if it were given to him. Let us just touch lightly on one sole item of the Occult Teachings and see where it leads us. It is taught in the Ancient Books that the 'primitive' race of mankind was ‘boneless'. With the average mentality amongst men, such a statement would probably result in loud guffaws, and it would serve the incautious revealer of such a doctrine right, for it is always necessary to consider one's audience before a performance! But one Scientist, (Sir William Crookes), brushes the 'Unknowable' very closely, and shows what potentialities there are for the acceptance of such Occult Teachings when he says: "Let us start at the moment when the first element came into existence. Before this time, matter as we know it, was not. It is equally impossible to conceive of matter without energy, as of energy without matter; from one point of view both are convertible terms. Before the birth of atoms, all those forms of energy, which become evident when matter acts upon matter, could not have existed — they were locked up in the protyle as latent potentialities only.” 
This is true of course for those forms of energy which become evident in the laboratory of the Chemist and Physicist; but there are other forms of energy wedded to other forms of matter which are supersensuous, yet are known to the Adepts. But the 'atoms' are never 'born' nor yet 'created', for they are eternal within the bosom of the One Atom – 'the Atom of Atoms'. Professor Crookes continues elsewhere: “Let us pause at the end of the first complete vibration and examine the result. We have already found the elements of water, ammonia, carbonic acid, the atmosphere, plant and animal life, phosphorous for the brain, salt for the Seas, clay for the solid earth...phosphates and silicates sufficient for a world and inhabitants not so very different from what we enjoy at the present day. True, the human inhabitants would have to live in a state of more than Arcadian simplicity, and the absence of calcic phosphate would be awkward as far as the bone is concerned." 
Here we have a justification by an eminent Scientist of some of the assertions in Occult Teachings, and that of the 'boneless Race' especially. 
Firstly, that neither the stars nor the Sun can be said to be constituted solely of those terrestrial elements with which the Chemist is familiar, though they are all present in the Sun's outward robes, as well as several more elements so far unknown to Science. 
Secondly, that our Globe has its own special laboratory on the faraway outskirts of its atmosphere, crossing which every atom and molecule changes and differentiates from its primordial nature. 
And thirdly, that though no element present in our Earth could ever be possibly found wanting in the Sun, there are many others which have either not reached, or not as yet been discovered on, our Earth. Some may be missing in certain stars and heavenly bodies in the process of formation; or, though present in them, these elements, on account of their present state, may not respond as yet to the usual scientific tests. 
In the above mentioned case we have given you yet another instance of how Science gives unconscious confirmation to many of the teachings of Occult Science. But we do not wish you to be under the impression that we have a grudge against Science. Far from it. The only reason why we draw your attention to these things is that we are presenting you with facts you may never have heard of before; or, if you have, these very necessary comparisons may not have been presented to you, so that you may have been reluctant to accept many or all of these Truths. It is our sincere endeavour to make everything as clear as possible to our Students, so that there shall be present in their minds the least amount of doubt. As we proceed with the Studies, more and more apparently strange and startling principles and laws will be revealed. You are, of course, aware that when this Grade is passed that we have reached only the end of our First Outer Grade. But we hope that in these preliminary Lectures you will have found much that is interesting and helpful. 
Light is the first begotten, and the first emanation of the Supreme, and Light is Life, says the Evangelist as well as the Kabalist. Both are Electricity — the Life Principle, the Anima Mundi pervading the Universe, the electric vivifier of all things. Life is the great Protean Magician, and under the Divine Will of the Architect; although when we say 'Architect you must not confuse this with a belief denoting a personal and anthropomorphic God, for, Kabalistically speaking, the Architect is the generic name for the Sephiroth, the Builders of the Universe, just as the 'Universal Mind' represents the collectivity of the ‘Angelic' Minds. This principle should always be remembered if we are going to have a clear conception of the frame-work of our Solar System and its Rulers and Builders and its multifarious omnipotent waves of Beings and Forces that gave and give birth to every form as well as to every living being. From the swelling electric bosom of Light springs Matter and Spirit. Within its Beams lie the beginnings of all physical and chemical action, and of all Cosmic and Spiritual phenomena; it vitalises and disorganises; it gives Life and produces death, and from its Primordial Point emerged gradually into existence the myriads of worlds, visible and invisible celestial bodies. It was at the Ray of this first Mother, one in three, that “God', according to Plato, “lighted a Fire which we now call the Sun,” and which is not the cause of either light or heat, but merely the focus, or, as we might say, the lens, by which the Rays of the Primordial Light become materialised, are concentrated upon our Solar System, and produce all the correlations of forces; and this is the Ether. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
