SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER 
Grade 1. Number 49. 
Dear Disciple, 
Your Teachers consider that the time is now ripe for developing the Meditation exercise a little further. Before you commence your future meditations take a candle, light it, and place it on your left-hand side before a mirror in front of which you should be seated comfortably. You should sit about two or three feet away from the mirror, and the candle should be placed in such a manner that it stands three inches away from the mirror surface and approximately in a straight line with the outside edge of your left shoulder as shown in the diagram below: 

The candle should be reflected in the mirror, but the main thing is to place it in such a way that the mirror surface in front of you is completely free from anything that might prevent you from looking into it. Look at your own face as you sit in front of the mirror, and keep your eyes steadily fixed at one point of your reflection. You may look at the point just between your eyes above the nose, or concentrate your gaze directly at one of your eyes, taking care that you do not continually shift your gaze from one eye to the other, in other words: look with one eye at one spot only, for if you try it you will see that, although both your eyes are open, only one of them is actually focussed on one spot at the time. If you close one eye and fix the other at one spot, and then close that eye suddenly and open the other, without shifting the first focus, you will see what we mean; for you will find that the eye that was first closed does not now see the same spot as the other; it is actually focussed elsewhere! In ordinary ways the eyes shift their focus continually with most persons; there are very few who have a fixed gaze, for if they always fixed their eyes in the way we need it for concentration exercises they would soon seem to be staring. But you must avoid that also, for if you stared there would be stress, and we must learn to fix our gaze and relax at the same time. 
You may look anywhere you like so far as your features are concerned, you may look at the tip of your nose (that is to say the tip of the nose in the mirror) or at one eyebrow; but remember that once you have selected a certain spot, that you stick to it for the rest of your meditation as much as possible. This is very difficult and needs intense concentration, as you will find; remember also to look from the back of your head, as we told you before. 
This is the first of an important series of exercises, known as ‘mirror practise'. We had no intention at first to give you this exercise in the First Grade, but as the progress of our Students has been so uniformly excellent we have advanced this mirror practise a little as a token of our appreciation of the seriousness and sincerity evinced by our Students of this Grade. 
One quarter-of-an-hour of this new sort of meditation will be sufficient for the first month, whenever you can find the time and opportunity to practise it. After you have done this for six weeks you should write to us and tell us what results you have obtained. We are not going to give you any hints as to what you might expect, for that would prejudice you in favour of such statements. Here again, it will be different for each individual, but we should like a report in this instance. Please make notes after each experiment, and keep the notes, so that you may refer to them when you write to us, and then select those experiences which you consider most important. 
And now we must continue our study of vibration and movement, for this is also very important, and there are as yet a good many things to be said about them. You will remember our previous allusion to the 'wheels'. These 'wheels' are the centres of force around which primordial Cosmic matter expands, and, passing through all the six stages of consolidation they become spheroidal, and in the end they are transformed into globes or spheres such as you see in the sky in the form of planets, or as they are within the human body in the form of 'sacred centres', about which we shall tell you many things in time to come. 
It is one of the fundamental teachings of Occult Science, as well as of Esoteric Cosmogony, that during the Aeons of Life, Motion assumes an evergrowing tendency (from the moment of the lirsu ‘awakening' of a Kosmos to a new DAY) to circular movement. 
During the periods of rest (when the whole of a cosmic or planetary system goes to sleep, so to say) the 'Life' still thrills and pulsates through every slumbering atom, just as life does in the sleeping human form, and is re-invigorated by that Sun-ray reflected from the Moon. We ask you to study this Law carefully and draw your own comparisons between the Above and the Below. And — by the way — you should apply this kind of comparison to all the phenomena of life and being, active or latent, in future; for it will give you an added realisation of the great universal Laws, apart from what we are telling you. We say again: do not be afraid to make mistakes, for we can always explain all things to you and put you right again if you do err in your conclusions at times. We think it would be a good idea if you obtained some good modern textbooks upon Heat, Light and Sound. These will be useful in order that you may compare the teachings of Science in regard to these principles (which Science does not understand at all, although there are millions of textbooks on these subjects, and Science degrees are granted by the Universities all over the world to those who are considered to have succeeded in graduating), we repeat; we shall compare these principles with the real Occult Scientific Teachings. 
It is taught that “The Deity becomes a whirlwind". You may ask; who is there to ascertain the difference in that Motion, when all is reduced to its primal essence during the 'Days of Rest', when not even the 'Sons of Light' — who are in the Higher Realms during such times - are present to witness it? 
The answer is that firstly everything in Nature has to be judged by analogy; and secondly: that although even the Highest Deities, such as the Archangels, are unable to penetrate the Mysteries which lie too far beyond our Planetary System and the visible Kosmos, yet were there great Seers and Prophets (like Ezekiel) in olden times who were enabled to perceive the mystery of Breath and Motion respectively as they were when the Systems of the Worlds were at rest and plunged in their periodic sleep. 
The 'wheels' are also called 'Rotae' - the moving wheels of the celestial orbs participating in the world's Creation - when the meaning refers to the animating principle of stars, planets or atoms. In the Kabalah they are represented by the Auphanim, the Angels of the 
Spheres and Stars, of which they are the informing Souls. 
This Law of vortical movement in primordial matter is one of the oldest conceptions too of Greek Philosophy, whose first historical Sages were nearly all initiates of the Mysteries. In the last few centuries Science and Philosophy have re-discovered this Law to a certain extent. In Swedenborg's Essay on the Vortical Theory, translated by Clissold, we find the following: “The first cause is the infinite or unlimited. This gives existence to the finite or limited. (Or the Logos in its manifestation and the Universe or Kosmos). That which produces a limit is analogous to motion. The limit produced is a point, the essence of which is motion; but only a conatus of it. (In Occult Science it is not a 'conatus', but a change from Eternal Vibration, in the Unmanifested, to Vortical Motion, in the phenomenal or manifested World). From this first proceed extension, space, figure and succession, or time. As in geometry a point generates a line, a line a surface, and a surface a solid, so here the conatus of the point tends towards lines, surfaces and solids. In other words, the Universe is contained in ovo in the first natural point. 
The Motion toward which the conatus tends is circular, since the circle is the most perfect of all figures — the most perfect figure of the motion above described must be perpetually circular; that is to say, it must proceed from the centre of the periphery and from the periphery to the centre". This is in full accord with Occult Science, although Swedenborg was not a 'Scientist but a 'Seer', and, furthermore, in spite of the fact that most of this Seer's visions were figments of his imagination only, and had no connection with actuality! 
The 'Fifth Stage of Evolution', referred to in the Ancient Teachings (later we shall discuss those stages) is called 'Creation' exoterically. It is the archebiosis, or life-origination; origination in so far as the manifestation of life on all the seven planes of being is concerned. It is at this period of evolution that the absolute external universal motion, or vibration, that which is called in Esoteric language the 'Great Breath', differentiates into the primordial, first mani festation, Atom. More and more, as chemical and physical sciences progress, does this Occult Axiom find its corroboration in the world of knowledge; the scientific hypotheses, that even the simplest elements of matter are identical in their nature, and differ from each other only in consequence of the various charges on the nucleus of the atom, or in their modes of atomic vibration, gains ground every day, as you know from your previous studies of some of the details of atomic structure; in truth, it has become an acknowledged fact. 
Science teaches that Sound is the result of vibrations of the air. 
But what is air? When it is said in the Purānas that "Ether produced Sound”, the statement is ridiculed. But could air exist if there were no etheric medium in Space to buoy up its molecules? 
The proofs brought forward in corroboration of the Old Teachings are scattered widely throughout the old Scriptures of the old Civilizations. The Purānas, the Zend Avesta, and the ancient classics are full of such facts; but no one has ever collected and collated them. The reason for this is that most of these facts — and also events — were recorded symbolically, and that the best scholars, the most acute minds, among our Aryanists and Egyptologists have been too often darkened by one or another preconception, or by one-sided views of their secret meaning. Yet even a parable is a spoken symbol: a fiction or a fable as some think; an allegorical representation, as Occult Science states, of life-realities, events and facts. 
The religious and esoteric history of every nation was embedded in symbols; it was never expressed literally in so many words. All the thoughts and emotions, all the learning and knowledge, revealed and acquired, of the early Races, found their pictorial expression in allegory and parable. Why? Because the spoken word has a potency not only unknown to, but even unsuspected and naturally disbelieved in, by the modern 'sages'. Because Sound and Rhythm are closely related to the four 'Elements of the Ancients; and because such or another vibration in the air is sure to awaken the corresponding Powers, union with which produces good or bad results, as the case may be. No Student was ever allowed to recite historical, religious, or real events of any kind in so many unmistakable words, lest the Powers connected with the events should be attracted once more. Such events were narrated only during Initiations, and every Student had to record them in corresponding symbols, drawn out of his mind and examined later by his Master, before they were accepted finally. Thus by degrees was the Chinese alphabet created, as before it the hieroglyphic symbols were fixed upon in Ancient Egypt. 
Please ponder over the above Principles of Vibration and Motion for a while. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
