SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER 
Grade 1. Number 46. 
Dear Disciple, 
As we are now approaching the end of our First Grade it will be necessary to interrupt our studies of the Sun-Path and complete our list of subjects as outlined in our Manifesto for Grade 1. The following subjects have not been touched upon yet: Glands, nerves, vibration, motion and rhythm. We shall take these in turn and commence with the glands, concentrating on the Pineal Gland first, which has become almost completely atrophied in the course of animal and human progress, but which once played a signal part in the general economy of primeval life. 
In the Ancient Books it says: “There were four-armed human creatures in those early days of the male-female (hermaphrodites); with one head, yet three eyes. They could see before them and behind them". Now the ‘third eye' was situated at the back of the head. Moreover, the statement that the latest hermaphrodite humanity was 'four-armed', unriddles probably the mystery of all the representations and idols of the exoteric Gods of India. On the Acropolis of Argos there was a rudely carved wooden statue, attributed to Dædalus, representing a three-eyed colossus, which was consecrated to Zeus Triopes, the 'three-eyed'. The head of this 'God' had two eyes in its face and one above on top of the forehead. It is considered the most archaic of all the ancient statues. 
The ancient tome continues: "A Kalpa later (4,320 million years [after the separation of the sexes]), men having fallen into matter, their spiritual vision became dim; and coordinately the third eye commenced to lose its power.... When the Fourth (Race) arrived at its middle age, the Inner vision had to be awakened, and acquired by artificial stimuli, the process of which was known to the old Sages". In other words, only through training and initiation, except in the case of natural-born ‘seers’, or, as they are now called: 'sensitives', 'psychics' and 'mediums'. 
"The Third Eye, likewise, getting gradually petrified, soon disappeared”. The expression 'petrified' is curious. The back-eye', which is, of course, the pineal gland, so-called, is a small pea-like mass of grey nervous matter attached to the back of the third ventricle of the brain, and it contains almost invariably mineral concretions and sand. Now this will give you a clue to our advice to see “colours' with the back of the sight of vision. By concentrating on this point within the brain you will eventually — if you have not done so already — stimulate the pineal gland to such an extent that the 'inner vision', or third eye, will begin to function more or less naturally once more. 
“The double-faced became the one-faced, and the eye was drawn deep into the head and is now buried under the hair. During the activity of the Inner Man (or during meditations, trances and spiritual vision) the eye swells and expands. The Arhat (or adept who is worthy) sees and feels it, and regulates his action accordingly. The undefiled (Disciple) need feel no danger: (but) he who keeps himself not in purity will receive no help from the 'Deva Eye'.” By the way, this ‘purity' applies more to pure thinking, producing Secret Peace and Power, than to anything else. It does not apply to natural functions, unless these are exercised in excess, thus destroying the Peace of Mind and Body, with the accompanying loss of power. Not only is the 'third eye' now inside the brain, but the eyes in the human embryo are also formed within it and grow from within outwards. One Scientist, thinking the inside of the brain a queer place for the eye, and attempting to explain the phenomenon on Darwinian lines — has suggested the curious view that ‘our' earliest vertebrate ancestor was a 'transparent creature, and hence did not mind where the eyes were situated.' Strangely enough, man was originally a 'transparent creature, according to the Ancient Teachings, and therefore all is well!! Occultism, with its teachings of the gradual development of senses (from within outwards', from astral prototypes, is correct. The 'third eye' retreated inwards when its course was run — another point in favour of our teachings. 
The allegorical expression of the Hindu mystics who speak of the "Eye of Shiva', the Tri-lochana, or 'three-eyed', thus receives its justification and raison d'être; the transference of the Pineal Gland (once that Third Eye) to the forehead being an exoteric license. This also throws a light on the mystery — incomprehensible to some — on the connection between abnormal, or spiritual seership, and the physiological and psychological purity of the Seer. Of course, the normal and abnormal state of the brain, and the degree of active work in the Medulla Oblongata reacts powerfully on the Pineal Gland too, for owing to the number of centres' in that region, which controls by far the greatest number of the physiological actions of the animal economy, and also owing to the close and intimate neighbourhood of the two, a very powerful 'inductive' action must be exerted by the Medulla on the Pineal Gland. 
Science asserts that many of the animals — especially among the lower orders of the vertebrata - have a third eye, now atrophied, but which was necessarily active in its origin. The Hatteria species, a lizard of the order Lacertilia, discovered in New Zealand - which is a part of ancient Lemuria - presents this peculiarity in a most extra ordinary manner; the same can be said of the chameleon and certain reptiles, and even fishes. Haeckel says: “Deeply placed within the head, covered by thick skin and muscles, true eyes, that cannot see, are found in certain animals. Among the vertebrata there are blind moles and field mice, blind snakes and lizards They shun the daylight, dwelling...under the ground. They were not originally blind, but have evolved from ancestors that lived in the light and had well-developed eyes. The atrophied eye beneath the opaque skin may be found in these blind beings in every stage of reversion”. And if two eyes could become so atrophied in lower animals, why not one eye — the pineal gland - in man, who is but a higher animal in his physical aspect? 
René Descartes saw in the pineal gland the Seat of the Soul. He said: “Although the Soul is joined to every part of the body (which ‘soul? is of course the Higher Mind), there is one special portion of the latter in which the 'Soul' exercises its functions more specially than in any other”. And, as neither the heart, nor yet the brain could be that ‘special' locality, he concluded that it was that little gland which was tied to the brain. Descartes was wrong of course, as he was wrong in so many other things, but yet the Pineal Gland can be developed for the use of the Higher Mind, so that it can see beyond the material Earth-Realm. 
The glands of the human body play a most important part in regard to our looks, height, size and mentality, various characteristics, in short: they are responsible for the sum total of our personality. Science is only at the threshold of its investigations in regard to the functions of the known and, as yet, unknown glands. But there is one fact that stands out above all the rest, and that is the uselessness of treating one gland when it is out of its normal condition, for all glands interact, one upon another, and when one is diseased, disturbed or unbalanced it throws all the rest out of gear. We have, however, no intention of writing a medical treatise on the glands, for they do not come within the scope of our studies to that extent. At the same time we should have some small idea in regard to the general working of these important parts of our body, although later on we shall have more to say about the secret centres of the human system; and in Grade 2. both glands and nerves will be discussed again. 
There are two methods of gathering information about the glands whose importance for medicine and psychiatry is becoming greater daily: the clinical and the experimental methods. Some individuals are born with one or another of their endocrine glands either smaller or larger or more or less active than usual. Several grow so close to the surface of the body that any abnormality can be easily seen. Others, which are more securely hidden, can be detected by X-rays, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), ultrasound and other diagnostic medical imaging techniques. Whenever an endocrine gland is exceptionally large or noticeably sluggish, the individual in whom this abnormal condition occurs will exhibit other peculiarities, either of physical or mental development – most likely of both. From the clinic and the animal laboratory some very definite information has been obtained, and in many cases the knowledge has been carried over to explain both common and uncommon variations of normal or abnormal personality. 
The human body contains many thousands of glandular structures, some large, some small, some simple, some complex, but all of them absolutely essential to its proper growth and health. There are the sweat glands, the salivary glands, the gastric glands of the stomach, liver, kidneys and pancreas, and so on. They take up certain substances from the blood stream, or from the intestinal tract, transform them and then emit them through well-defined ducts. But there are also other glandular structures which seem to have no definite outlets. The substances which they secrete do not pass out through well-defined passages but are absorbed directly by the blood stream. It is these ductless, or endocrine glands of internal secretion, which affect personality. Such are, for instance, the thyroid, parathyroid, thymus and adrenal glands and the pineal and pituitary bodies, the latter both located within the cranium. Because these organs have no visible outlets it was only within comparatively recent times that they were supposed to have no function at all, or, if a purpose was assigned to them, it was usually highly fantastic and without any basis in fact. 
Broadly speaking, we may say that the thymus and the pineal are the glands which control childhood. They cease to grow at puberty, and in most individuals the pineal body disappears entirely after adolescence and very little is left of the thymus subsequent to this period. The parathyroids are so tightly embedded in the thyroids in all carnivorous and omnivorous animals that many fatal operations were performed before it was discovered that the two are separate organs. 
In normal individuals the thyroid glands function throughout life. In children they are necessary both to normal physical growth and to proper mental development. In adult life they are essential to body metabolism and mental stability. The four parathyroids are essential to life, but the thyroid itself may be taken out if diseased. The parathyroids are needed on account of the cancelling effect they have upon various poisons continually given off by the body; if they are removed the patient dies; the thyroid can be replaced by certain preparations prescribed by the physician, or taken according to his directions. As in the case of the parathyroids and the thyroids, the anterior lobe of the pituitary and the cortex of the adrenals are essential to life, while the medulla of the adrenals and the posterior lobe of the pituitary furnish the secretions which have the more pronounced effect on the personality. 
The adrenals regulate our emotions, as the thyroids do our mental life. And the posterior lobe of the pituitary body, in the same manner, controls the muscles and skeletal bones directly. 
A well-balanced person is therefore a thoroughly normal individual whose endocrine system is well attuned. His every gland secretes just enough but not too much. His thyroid keeps his brain active, his pituitary body his muscles well toned; his adrenals his circulation well regulated and his emotional apparatus ready for emergencies. The slow, stupid, colourless people have too little thyroid secretion, while those who are super active mentally and temperamentally have a large amount of this extract. The very fat or very tall people have extraordinary pituitaries. The energetic, executive types are well supplied with adrenaline. And most of those who seem exceptionally youthful long after they have reached chronological maturity have had thymuses or pineals which have functioned longer than is natural in adult life. 
During recent years there have been many ‘hormones' discovered which are the distinct chemical substances formed by one organ which act in a specific manner on the function of other organs of the body. The formulæ of some hormones are known, thus allowing synthetic hormones to be produced in the pure state. When such synthetic hormones are given to a subject, deficiency states of the gland in question can be corrected. They are given by mouth or by injection. Hormones are liberated by other glands than those of the endocrine system. They also occur in plants in minute quantities. 
These few quotations must suffice for the time being, until later on we go more deeply into the subject of the sacred centres of the body, connected with the interior and spiritual development of man. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master 
