SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER 
Grade 1. Number 43. 
Dear Disciple, 
In this Lecture we will develop a little further the explanation of the nature of that Force which reaches the Earth and all Planets in our Solar System from the Sun. Nearly all physicists are agreed that there exist in Nature two agencies, namely Matter, which is ponderable, visible and tangible, and a certain something which is imponderable, invisible, and appreciable only by its influence on Matter. The latter agency, which has been called 'caloric', is not a mere form of motion, not a vibration amongst the particles of ponderable matter, but itself a material substance flowing from the Sun through Cosmic Space, filling the voids between the particles of 'solid' bodies, and conveying by sensation the property called 'heat'. It fills every point of our Solar System, for it is the physical residue, so to say, of Ether, its envelope on our Plane; Ether having to serve other Cosmic and terrestrial purposes besides being the ‘agent' for transmitting light. This Ether is the 'Astral Fluid', or Light, of the Kabalists, and the Seven Rays of the Sun-God. 
The nature of this Sun-force may be described as follows: 
1. That it may be added to, and abstracted from other bodies and measured with mathematical precision. 
2. That it augments the volume of bodies, which are again reduced in size by its abstraction, as in the case of the atoms which flatten out to nothing when it is absent. 
3. That it modifies the forms, properties, and conditions of all other bodies. 
4. That it passes by radiation through the most perfect vacuum that can be formed, in which it produces the same effects on the thermometer as the atmosphere. 
5. That it exerts mechanical and chemical forces which nothing can restrain, as in volcanoes and fulminating or explosive compounds. 
6. That it operates in a sensible manner on the nervous system, and can produce pain when in excess, and disorganisation of the tissues. 
If it had only a mere property of quality it could not augment the volume of other bodies; for this purpose it must itself have volume, it must occupy space, and it must, therefore, be a material agent. If it were only the effect of vibratory motion amongst the particles of ponderable matter, it could not radiate from hot bodies without the simultaneous transition of the vibrating particles; but the fact stands out that heat can radiate from material ponderable substance without loss of weight of such substance. Therefore everything in Nature, or the Material Universe, is composed of two descriptions of matter, the one essentially active and ethereal, and the other passive and motionless (male and female, or positive and negative). And how could it be otherwise? Gross ponderable matter is the body, the shell, of matter or substance, the female passive principle; and the other is called 'Fohatic Force', or Prana, the male and active. This second Principle is, on our Earth, the second Principle of the septenary Element; in the atmosphere it is that of Air, which is the Cosmic Gross Body; in the Sun it becomes the Solar Body and that of the Seven Rays; in Sidereal Space it corresponds with yet another Principle, and so on and so forth. The whole is a homogeneous Unity alone, the parts are all differentiations. The Sun-Force is a self-active Principle, for its own particles it has repulsion, sending them out into Cosmic Space; for the particles of ponderable matter it has affinity; it attracts the particles of ponderable matter with forces which vary inversely as the squares of the distance; in this way it acts through ponderable matter. 
But if Universal, or rather Cosmic in our case, Space were filled with Sun-force alone (without the presence of ponderable matter in that Space), Sun-force would also be inactive — having nothing to act upon — and it would constitute a boundless ocean of powerless or quiescent Ether, for ponderable matter, however inactive of itself, has certain properties by which it modifies and controls the action of the Sun-force; both being governed by immutable Laws that have their origin in the mutual relations and specific properties of each. 
Thus we reach the Occult Scientific explanation of cohesion and adhesion, for by the attraction of the Sun-force for ponderable matter, it unites and holds together all things which have affinity to each other; while by self-repulsive energy it can separate and expand all things. Therefore the tendency of modern Science to teach that 'heat is motion' should be changed to the formula that it is 'a specific force or form of motion', or the reverberation of it, and for sound repercussion, on our plane, of that which is a perpetual motion of that Substance on Higher Planes; for our world and senses are ceaselessly victims of Illusion, even the Sun and all its forces being but reflections of conditions on those Higher Planes. 
Although Sun-force is a material substance it is without weight, substance, form or colour, it is matter infinitely divisible, and its particles repel each other; its rarity is such that we have no word, except Ether, by which to express it — unless we call it Spirit! Yet it is not the Aether of the Occultists, but only one of its principles, Aether itself being one of the principles of Primordial Substance, from which all the lower or outer manifestations proceed. 
It is the action of Sun-force — or rather 'Fohat’, to give it its true Occult technical term — that produces life. You will now see clearer its connection with the force proceeding from the Moon, after the Lunar body has reflected it as described before. After acting as a preserver of life and forms — the Vishnu Principle of the Hindus — it becomes a destroyer — the Shiva Principle, a correlation seemingly unknown to Science. 
As we told you before: everything alive is charged with this Sun-force, and Occult Science knows it also by its specific term of Primordial Matter. This also applies to solid Earth, rocks, crystals and metals etc., which are also charged with the same Force. 
But there are differences in the capacities of different kinds of ponderable matter to receive Sun-force, and upon this depends the various changing conditions of matter; the solid, the liquid, the gaseous condition. Solid bodies attract in excess over fluid bodies, and hence their firm cohesion. When a portion of molten metal is poured upon a plate of solid metal, the molten metal becomes as solid because there is a rush of Sun-force from the liquid to the solid, and in the equalisation, the particles, previously loose or liquid, are more closely brought together. 
Hardness and softness, solidity and liquidity, are not essential conditions of bodies but depend on the relative proportions of ethereal and ponderable matter of which they are composed. The most elastic gas may be reduced to the liquid form by the abstraction of Sun-force, and again converted into a firm solid, the particles of which would cling together with a force proportional to their augmented affinity for Sun-force. On the other hand, by adding a sufficient quantity of the same principle to the densest metals (by heating), their attraction for it is diminished when they are expanded into the gaseous state, and their cohesion is destroyed. 
Space, inter-stellary, inter-planetary, inter-material, inter-organic is not a vacuum, but it is filled with a subtle fluid or gas we call, as the ancients did. AITH-UR – Solar Fire - Aether. This fluid, unchangeable in composition, indestructible, invisible, pervades everything and all ponderable matter. But it is ‘un-changeable' only auring — what the Hindus term, 'manvantaric periods' (a Manvantara is a time period of 4,320,000,000 years, or 'Day of Brahmā'), after which it merges once more into the 'Root of Nature', or the eternal primordial substance from which comes all manifestation, it is ‘invisible for ever in its own essence, but seen in its reflected coruscations, called the 'Astral Light' by the modern Kabalists. Yet, conscious and grand Beings, clothed in that same essence, move in it. And a 'world' is built up in this ethereal fluid, and moves through an ocean of it. Without it there could be no motion; without it particles of ponderable matter could not glide over each other, without it the atom - small, such as that known by Science, large, as our Solar System - would collapse; without it there could be no impulse to excite those particles into action; and this is another aspect of the 'consciousness' within the atom, whatever its size. It determines the condition of the bodies. Did it not exist there could be no change of constitution in substance; water, for instance, could exist only as a substance, compact and insoluble beyond any conception we could form of it. It could never be ice, never fluid, never vapour, except for Aether. 
Aether connects Sun with Planet, Planet with Planet, Man with Planet, man with man. Without it there could be no communication in the Universe; no light, no heat, no phenomena of motion. Such, then, is the nature of that which is sent forth incessantly by the sevenfold Ray of the Sun; and these are the Archaic Teachings, millions of years old!! 
But to 'Science' Aether is only a 'hypothetical agent'!!! Fire is Aether in its purest form, and hence it is not regarded as matter; but there are two 'Fires', and a distinction is made between them in the Occult Teachings. The first, or the purely formless and invisible Fire, concealed in the Central Spiritual Sun, is spoken of as Triple (metaphysically), while the Fire of the Manifested Kosmos is Septenary, throughout both the Universe and our Solar System. “The Fire of Knowledge", it is taught - "burns up all action on the plane of Illusion”. Therefore those who have acquired it and are emancipated are called “Fires". 
In the 'Anugītā' there is a sentence, pregnant with meaning, spoken by Nārada, in which he says: "Thus these seven (senses, smell, taste, sight, hearing, etc.,), are the causes of emancipation”. Please ponder over this. 
In the Vedas the Sun is called 'Loka-Chakshuh, the eyes world (meaning our planetary world), and he is one of the three chief 
He is called indifferently the Son of Dyaus or of Aditi, because Listinction is made with reference to, or scope allowed for, the esoteric meaning. Thus he is depicted as drawn by seven horses, and by one horse with seven heads; the former referring to the seven planets, the latter to their common origin from the One Cosmic Element. This One Element' is called figuratively 'Fire'. The Vedas teach that "fire verily is all the Deities”. The meaning of the allegory is plain, for we have both the Sacred Ancient Books and Modern Science to explain it, though the two differ in more than one particular. The Occult Teachings reject the hypothesis — born of the Nebular Theory — that the (seven) great planets have evolved from the Sun's Central Mass, of this our visible Sun, at any rate. The first condensation of Kosmic matter took place, of course, about a central nucleus, its parent Sun. But our visible Sun, it is taught merely detached itself earlier than all the others, as the rotating mass contracted, and is their elder, bigger, 'brother', therefore not their 'father'. Behind all this there is an important Law, which will be developed by us in due course. 
May the Great Light illumine you. 
Your Hidden Master. 
N.B. This Lecture completes the first step on the last Triangle in Grade 1. Our discussions on the Sun are not yet complete as far as this grade is concerned, but if you wish to write to us about anything else we shall be pleased to hear from you as usual. 
