SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER 
Grade 1. Number 50. 
Beloved Student, 
And now we have arrived at the final Lecture of Grade 1. completing the Fourth Triangle. By means of the four triangles of this Grade you have built your first Pyramid and completed the First Twelve Steps towards a better understanding of yourself — the Microcosm — and the Macrocosm of our own Solar System or Kosmos. 
All things are relative, however, and our Solar System is only a Microcosm of our Universe, of which it forms a minute part only, an almost invisible speck, no larger in comparison with the Universe than an atom is to a human being. 
Going backwards from the Solar System to a human being we realise that each of our seven centres, each of our seven Principles, is a microcosm of a human macrocosm of which, in a way, each electron is a microcosm; and thus we can go backward or forward in an unending series of comparisons, stretching far into the unknown either way. 
Can you stretch your imagination far enough to know what this means? Do you realise that there is no limit whatsoever to the extensions of material and spiritual life above and below; outwards or inwards? Yet this is true, and all these large or small, divine or material regions are filled with the Breath of God, the Great Vibration, the Divine Radiation, spreading everywhere and pervading all things and vivifying them throughout the known and unknown Universes. 
If we can realise that there is life in manifold varieties on our own planet or globe, the Earth, we should be careful not to deny the same possibilities to other planets within our Solar System. And if once we accept this, what is there to prevent us from acknowledging the possibility of life on unseen and unknown planets that whirl round the great Suns we see glittering in the night-sky in the form of stars? And if you will grant this reasonable Hypothesis, what is there to prevent you from granting the possibility of life on the unseen and unknown electrons whirling round the inner, central Sun of the atom? Many of those electrons have satellites, from which they draw the principles of life, or death; satellites who reflect the rays of the inner sun of the atom towards their own particular electronic planets. And in between those electrons swarm multitudes of smaller planets, asteroids, comets and meteoric clouds of atomic cosmic dust!! As above, so below an axiom that never fails to express perfectly one of the greatest Universal Laws. 
You should therefore also realise that the inner sun, the nucleus of each atom, does but reflect the Light of the Hidden Sun, which is not in the atom any more than it is in our Solar System or than the Divine Soul is IN our bodies. 
We should like you to think hard about these great Principles before you fill in the accompanying examination papers, for if you can in time attain to a perfect realisation of these Laws you will have a great illumination as to what the Universe is under God, and many things will become clearer to you that were dark before. 
All this has nothing to do whatsoever with religion, Sectarianism or anything else that might come under these or similar headings; it is pure Occult Scientific Philosophy and nothing else. The Occultist does not say that this Religion, or that Sect is good, bad or indifferent. All Religions based on Light and Goodness, are good if they practise the great ideals of Purity, Service and so on. They are good if they lead their adherents to an appreciation of the might, power, peace and secrecy of God; no matter how they explain that Divine Thought. Religion is good if it leads to an elevation of all our inner powers; if it brings ecstasy to the Higher Mind by real attunement with the Beauty of the Sacred Laws. It is good if it leads to tolerance, is not dogmatic or fanatic in any way, if it is broadminded and can see the Good which is God, in every thing that is God — material and spiritual. 
It is good if it makes the believer turn away in sorrow — but not in wrath — from that which is not kind, good or beautiful, which Goodness and beauty again comes always from God and therefore is God and Good! The only heathen is he who has no pure Ideals!! But we must not and cannot condemn him for his lack, for it is but due to the present state of his evolution. He can grow out of it; most of them do in the end, though it may take millions of years as we count them according to 'human' reasoning. 
Nay! The materialist, the unbeliever, the man without ideals, the man who cannot appreciate beauty or goodness is not an object for scorn or hatred. He should be pitied — without showing it to him — he should be given love, patience and understanding, showing him that one who is higher evolved is nearer to God, who is ALL Love, Patience and Understanding. 
In this manner you may possibly give the first impetus towards the good and beautiful, which in the end will melt his adamant, material and un-evolved Mind. And in doing so you will acquire merit beyond all knowing by the intellect. Then you will have given proof that you are on a higher rung of the ladder leading to the Avenues of the House of God. You will be a true Philosopher, and you will have true Religion, which is pity for the struggler who has as yet such a long way to go; which is forbearance towards those who dwell in ignorance: which is a true appreciation of the GLORY which is awaiting us all at the end of our long journey; which is a knowledge that we have all been just such ignorant strugglers on the Path in the past history of our many cycles of incarnations. 
By sincere study of the Principles of Occult Science the day will dawn for all of you when you will have a sudden glimpse of the Glory. It may last for seconds, minutes or even longer; it may be that it is just a flash in which you behold LIGHT. It can never last very long, for if it did it would sear, scorch and parch all of your material Principles with an unbearable blast of Secret Power!! But that one glimpse will change the whole course of your existence; it will fill you with an unutterable longing to become worthy to dwell within its Radiance for ever; it will turn all things material into worthless dross, and give you at the same time a deeper understanding of your duties towards all material things and beings. It will give you knowledge, which nothing can ever take away or destroy, of the reasons why you are on Earth in a human shape; it will tell you in no uncertain manner in which direction lies your Destiny, and what are the duties to your fellow-beings. 
It will open the Gate, and the strait and narrow Path will become one of unspeakable beauty, where dwell the Spirits of your kindred, where grow the celestial flowers full of Grace and perfection, each flower a shining symbol of all that is good, beneficial, virtuous, upright, pious, righteous, worthy, excellent, merciful, unblemished and Immaculate. Such is Illumination, the Crown of the Good, a Benediction from God for the Just and Enlightened. This is the Goal to which all the truly inspired Messengers and Teachers have pointed for Millenniums of Centuries. A brilliant Beacon that blazes with Light, Ravishment and Rapture; filling the Mind with Joy and Beatitude. And by the Gate waits the Avatar for those who have striven earnestly to climb up to the lustrous Effulgence of the Exalted and noble Blessings that await the seeker after Celestial Happiness, which is the Birthright of all. 
We have told you before that our material Light is but darkness; that the Light of the Sun is but a reflection, for of itself the Sun is but a disc and has no light, as the ancient Wisdom teaches. The Sun is dark and has no more light than a mirror which hangs in a dark room. Why it seems to blaze with light you may know or understand, and the reason is the same as that which causes the Moon to seem alight — Reflection. Compared with the true Radiance, all our light is darkness. It is as coarse and material as that which we know on Earth as Fire. The real Fire is something that bears no resemblance to earthly, material fire, just as earthly beauty — in whatever form — is but a shadow of the Celestial Beauty of the Higher Realms. All on Earth is illusion, and those who have not the sight, the un-illuminated ones, do not know what Light, Fire and Beauty are. 
Zoroaster taught that at the glorious sunset of the pious life, the Soul remains three days near his life-long friend, the body, and perceives and sees as much joyfulness as the whole living would possess. For him, the fourth day dawns in gloria in excelsis. From the midst of his worldly nearest and dearest relatives, friends and neighbours, the Soul, having been bidden pious adieux in holy blessings, ascends in the company of his guardian Angel, 'Shros' to render his account at the gate of ‘Chinvat Bridge'. In his upward ethereal journey, floating in the region of the sweet-scented balm of the soft South-Wind, he meets his own astral self, transformed into a handsome figure of gracefulness and seraphic beauty. This figure reveals itself to him as his Good Thoughts, Good Words and Good Deeds. Pleased with his welcome, and having rendered his account to 'Mehr Davar', the recorder at the Gate of Heaven, he passes the barrier to eternal bliss and happiness. 
After what we have told you in the First Grade of our work you will realise that in the above-mentioned teaching the 'Soul is the Higher Mind, and the good guardian Angel the true Soul. In reality the Higher Mind leaves the human body at 'death' together with the astral body in which it dwells in the same manner as it did before in the human body. 
But although this teaching of Zoroaster is true in essence, there are many hidden factors connected with it which such great Teachers could not reveal to the world at large, but only to their initiated Disciples. 
This will be the future task as your Masters. We can only hope that the study of our First Outer Grade has been pleasant and profitable to you all; that it has given you much food for thought; and that it has been as pleasant to you to read and study our Teachings as it has been for us to write and reveal them. 
May the Blessings of the Cosmic Good be yours; may the Protecting Wings of your Guardian Angel enfold you now and always, and may the Great Radiance pervade you with WELL-BEING and HAPPINESS. 
ANTARES. Supreme Grand Master. 
P. S. We enclose examination papers with this lecture which we ask you to please complete and return to us within 28 days of receipt-sooner if you can. As stated in these papers, there will now be a three-week break during which you will not receive any lectures to give you time to complete your exam. You should try to answer every question. Failure to return your completed papers on time may result in the suspension or termination of your membership. Your first lecture of Grade 2 will be sent to you three weeks from now. 
I add my good wishes to those of our beloved Grand Master, and may I have the felicity of guiding you through the next Grade; for your letters and your unseen — but nevertheless felt — Company have given me great happiness through the past year. 
With Best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
